URL: https://www.empireonline.com/movies/reviews/avatar-the-way-of-water/
Title: Avatar: The Way Of Water – Review | Empire Online

Movies
Reviews
News
Features
TV
Gaming
Podcasts
Empire VIP
Empire Magazine
Subscribe
Manage My Subscription
Newsletter
HOME|MOVIES|REVIEWS
Avatar: The Way Of Water Review
People:
Jermaine Clement
Zoe Saldaña
James Cameron
Sigourney Weaver
Sam Worthington
Kate Winslet
Life is good on Pandora, with Neytiri (Saldaña) and Jake (Worthington) putting down their weaponry to raise a family after their battle against the humans. But a new star in the heavens heralds the return of the Sky People, and soon the Sullys are on the run, allying with a sea tribe to make a stand against their oppressors.
By Nick De Semlyen | Updated on19th December 2022 at 9.56am
Release Date:

15 Dec 2022

Original Title:

Avatar: The Way Of Water

In the near-decade-and-a-half since we last visited Pandora, the humans in the film have travelled the 4.4 light years back to Earth, regrouped, made the return trip and built a new city-sized base on the alien moon. James Cameron has been about as busy. Besides mapping out a Lord Of The Rings-sized mythology for his burgeoning franchise (frankly we’ve lost count of how many Avatars are percolating in his brain at this point; we think it’s 32?), he’s been pushing technological envelopes left, right and centre, stirring up a mad brew of aquatic performance-capture, 3D tech and amped-up frame rates. The result, Avatar: The Way Of Water, is so dazzling to behold that adjectives like “dazzling” seem too anaemic to apply. It’s a leap beyond even what he pulled off with the first film, a phantasmagorical, fully immersive waking dream of a movie in which something impossible is happening on-screen at almost every moment. It’s a lot to process. And a timely reminder of what cinema is capable of when it dares to dream big.

Size is a key factor here — this is a sequel, after all, and the law of movie physics dictates that follow-ups must get increasingly colossal. The Way Of Water ticks this box in several ways. For one, there’s the ensemble of characters. All your old favourites are back (plus Norm Spellman), but making their bow are a group of azure urchins, the children of Neytiri (Zoe Saldaña) and Jake (Sam Worthington). The prospect of a blockbuster driven by kids can be a concerning one; Cameron, though, manages to keep things on the right side of saccharine. Even if none of these younglings are quite as winning as Aliens’ Newt — not even the adopted Spider (Jack Champion), a wild-child human space-sprog who brings her to mind — they’re all easy to root for, which is good news considering the second act of the movie leaves Jake and Neytiri behind to venture out on adventures with the new generation. The titchy Tuktirey (Trinity Jo-Li Bliss) doesn’t get much to do, but there are substantial storylines for Lo’ak (Britain Dalton), who finds a friend in an unlikely place, and Kiri (Sigourney Weaver, a 70-something playing a 14-year-old through VFX magic), the most interesting of the fresh characters, who appears to be getting set up to become a major player in future instalments.

The action, when it arrives, is thunderingly entertaining.

Then there’s the new environment. As you’ve probably gleaned by now, Cameron has activated his key mantra — just add water — returning to the ocean for the first time since 1997’s Titanic. Except this isn’t any ocean you’ve seen before. The first time he plunges us beneath the surface of Pandora’s big blue, the brain almost can’t take it all in: the images are crystal-sharp, hyper-real — see it in 3D HFR if you can — but the marine ecosystem teeming in every frame is mesmerisingly unearthly (you might find yourself taking your eyes off the important stuff to stare at an alien eel). It’s like a National Geographic documentary beamed in from another solar system, Cameron’s twin obsessions with sea-life and sci-fi fusing together in truly trippy fashion. The lengthy second act of the movie, in which the Sully family, fleeing the human villains, relocate to the Bora Bora-esque shores of a Pandoran island, will likely test the patience of some. (There are multiple fish-riding tutorials, as the Sullys get familiar with the barracuda-meets-dragonfly Skimwing and the adorable, seal-like Iwi.) But for those willing to tune into the strange and highly earnest vibe, it’s heady, entrancing stuff, particularly the screentime given to the Tulkan, a species of space-whale that proves unexpectedly moving — even if the drama on the beach is a little less compelling than what’s going on off it.

Which brings us to the plot. Interestingly, this is the one area in which Cameron has gone smaller. Relatively, of course: with moon-crossing odysseys and beasts the size of a submarine, he’s hardly gone Ken Loach. But the epic warring-species stakes of the original Avatar have been dialled down (for now), replaced by a simple revenge story. Stephen Lang’s granite-tough Colonel Quaritch, a major standout in the first film and a character deepened here, is back in avatar form, eager to avenge his own death (it’s a long story) by slaying his blue foes. And so for now, bigger questions will have to wait. A new resource coveted by humans that’s even more unobtainable than unobtanium doesn’t get elaborated on, while Edie Falco is introduced as the new human Big Bad (yes, Carmela Soprano gets her own exo-suit) but phases out of the action. Instead, we’re left with a stripped-down game of cat-and-mouse, designed to test every one of the Sullys to their limits. It’s an effective choice by Cameron, keeping the stakes clear and resulting in a powerful, emotional final hour, as Quaritch corners his quarry and turns up the heat.

The Way Of Water takes its sweet time getting to the melee — at well over three hours, it should really be called ‘The Way Of Wishing You Hadn’t Drunk That Water’ — but by the time it does, it’s made sure you care about what’s going on. And the action, when it arrives, is thunderingly entertaining. On one side: the Na’vi navy, astride battle-fish, ululating and bristling with spears. On the other, Quaritch and his blued-up squad of Marines, plus a swaggering, dickish Australian seadog named Scoresby (Brendan Cowell, near-stealing the show with his salty jargon), a conflicted marine biologist (Jemaine Clement, doing an American accent that might be the most alien thing in the film), and an armada of incredible military tech (scuttling crab-suits FTW). What ensues is a sea battle for the ages, a blisteringly exciting meld of live-action elements and visual-effects, which boggles the brain while never forgetting to focus on the heart. Where Cameron goes from here, who knows. But this is a reminder, after a long absence, that he’s still master and commander of making your jaw drop.

James Cameron has surfaced with a cosmic marine epic that only he could make: eccentric, soulful, joyous, dark and very, very blue. Yes, he’s still leagues ahead of the pack.
RELATED ARTICLES
98 Best Movies And TV Shows You Must See On Disney+ UK In November 2025

MOVIES | 23 02 2021

Fire And Water: Making The Avatar Films Review

TV SERIES | 07 11 2025

Sigourney Weaver On Sci-Fi, Her Avatar Journey, And Testing Her Limits

MOVIES | 06 11 2025

Avatar: Fire And Ash Brings Big ‘Realisations And Discoveries’ For Kiri, Teases Sigourney Weaver

MOVIES | 17 10 2025

Fire and Water: Making The Avatar Films Trailer Reveals Two-Part James Cameron Disney+ Docuseries

TV SERIES | 15 10 2025

Send Us Your Questions For James Cameron

MOVIES | 06 10 2025

Avatar: Fire And Ash’s Epic Airborne Battle Used Real Flames: ‘We Want People To Feel The Heat’

MOVIES | 19 09 2025

Avatar: Fire And Ash: Mick Scoresby Is Back After Losing An Arm To Payakan: ‘This Time It’s Personal’

MOVIES | 22 08 2025

Just so you know, we may receive a commission or other compensation from the links on this website - read why you should trust us
LEGAL INFO
PRIVACY POLICY
YOUR AD CHOICES
SUBSCRIPTION COMPLAINTS
COMPLAINTS
SUBSCRIBE TO EMPIRE
API
ABOUT US
SPEAK UP
PRIVACY SETTINGS
DO NOT SELL MY INFORMATION

© 1962-2025 Bauer Media Group

Bauer Consumer Media Ltd, Company number 01176085; Bauer Radio Limited, Company number: 1394141; Registered office: Media House, Peterborough Business Park, Lynch Wood, Peterborough PE2 6EA and H Bauer Publishing, Company number: LP003328; Registered office: The Lantern, 75 Hampstead Road, London NW1 2PL

All registered in England and Wales. VAT no 918 5617 01

H Bauer Publishing are authorised and regulated for credit broking by the FCA (Ref No: 845898)