URL: https://www.irishtimes.com/culture/film/review/2022/12/14/avatar-the-way-of-water-a-very-long-and-painful-trip-to-a-blue-blue-world/
Title: Avatar: The Way of Water review – I needed a dark room and an ice pack on my forehead after that – The Irish Times

Sections
Subscribe
Sign In
Home
Latest
Subscriber Only
Crosswords & Puzzles
Ireland
Politics
Opinion
Business
World
Sport
Your Money
Crime & Law
Property
Food
Health
Life & Style
Culture
Art
Books
Film
Music
Stage
TV & Radio
Environment
Technology
Science
Media
Abroad
Obituaries
Transport
Motors
Listen
Podcasts
Video
Photography
Gaeilge
History
Student Hub
Offbeat
Family Notices
Opens in new window
Sponsored
Subscriber Rewards
Competitions
Newsletters
Weather Forecast
Film
Review
Avatar: The Way of Water review – I needed a dark room and an ice pack on my forehead after that
The liquid images all look as if they have spent too much time dissolving industrial strength toilet block
Expand
Avatar: The Way of Water - all technology and very little story or plot
Donald Clarke
Wed Dec 14 2022 - 17:33
•
3 MIN READ
Avatar: The Way of Water
    
Director:
James Cameron
Cert:
12A
Starring:
Sam Worthington, Zoe Saldaña, Stephen Lang, Britain Dalton, Kate Winslet, Sigourney Weaver, Cliff Curtis, Joel David Moore, CCH Pounder, Edie Falco, Jemaine Clement
Running Time:
3 hrs 12 mins

“The Way of Water has no beginning and no end,” someone says about five or six hours into James Cameron’s bioluminescent mash-up of Free Willy and Rio Grande. That’s a little unfair. The thing does eventually stop. I’m sitting in a dark room with an ice pack on my forehead and it’s no longer with me. Mind you, Jim has promised another three episodes. So, perhaps that warning is on the money.

Over the last decade wiseacres have enjoyed arguing that, despite registering as the highest grossing movie of all time, the original Avatar has left no cultural footprint whatsoever. A successful re-release earlier this year proved, however, that the film is still remembered with affection. No wonder the other studios have more or less run screaming from The Way of Water.

Sadly, what we get in Part II is little more than a holding pattern for an incoming convoy of epics. It’s extremely long. It presents us with crisis and tragedy. But there is barely enough hard plot for an hour of telly.

We begin a decade or so after the events of the first film. Jake Sully, in the form of digitally altered Sam Worthington, has settled down in the forest with Neytiri (Zoe Saldaña) and their putatively adorable children.

READ MORE
‘Overrun with racist comments’: On Liveline, a rueful Kieran Cuddihy hits his stride
Bataclan attacks: I was an Irish 13-year-old in Paris and had sneaked out to a party
Keshk restaurant review: BYOB veteran still smoking after many years, just at higher prices
‘I left work to rear the kids, but now I feel alone, isolated from my husband and undesirable’

The “Sky People” (that’s us) return in search of our hero and the family is forced to flee to the arms of a nearby community of aqua-people. One of the kids meets up with a friendly whale-thing and becomes involved in efforts to defend that species from rapacious humans in search of ...

And on and on towards a perfectly satisfactory conflagration on the high seas that appears to nod consciously towards James Cameron’s second (and the world’s third) highest grossing movie. If you wondered what happened to the consciousness-swapping that gave the franchise its title, then you will continue to wonder in vain.

Let’s not fool ourselves. The current project is selling itself on the technology, not on the story. What Cameron has accomplished here would frustrate the imaginings of cinema professionals when Avatar was released. To what end though? The 3-D is more impressive, but the novelty still wears off after the first 20 minutes or so. The increased frame rate that everyone hated in The Hobbit films is back to confirm how one might spend an enormous amount of money to make something look intermittently cheap (the architects of Las Vegas have nothing on 48 fps). Cover your eyes if you long ago tired of work that prides itself on “world building”. Flee the building if you longer ago wearied of worlds built to the aesthetics of Roger Dean covers for 1970s Yes albums.

Name the actors: a scene from Avatar: Way of Water

And the exhausting blueness of it all? There were too many jokes about Smurfs 10 years ago. This time round, only the lyrics of the lamented Eiffel 65 will do the facetious business. “Yo, listen up here’s a story about a little guy that lives in a blue world,” the Italians sang in the immortal Blue (Da Ba Dee). The liquid images all look as if they have spent too much time dissolving industrial strength toilet block. The endless encounters with luminescent weeds and flaring variations on Yggdrasil do something to break that copper-sulphate monotony, but they can do little to help us distinguish between the blandly similar facial features (though that may be same-species bias on my part). It’s hard to care when somebody dies if you can’t tell one character from another. On the way out I remembered that Kate Winslet is in the cast, but dashed if I could tell you who she plays.

No doubt millions will be have no difficulty ferreting out the emotional core and propelling The Way of Water to box office success. But the indulgence of it all causes one to yearn for the raw, propulsive action of Cameron’s first two Terminator movies. Heck, his Piranha II: The Spawning had more fun in equally dangerous waters. How did we end up here?

Donald Clarke
Donald Clarke, a contributor to The Irish Times, is Chief Film Correspondent and a regular columnist
Opens in new window
Opens in new window
James Cameron
Kate Winslet
IN THIS SECTION
Hi-yah! Miss Piggy was one of my most hostile interviewees. Now she’s in line for the Barbie treatment
Four new films to see this week: Nuremberg, Born That Way, Alpha and Jujutsu Kaisen: Execution
John C Reilly: ‘I worked with this older Irish actor one time. He was bummed out if I said anything that wasn’t the lines’
Director Jon M Chu on Wicked: ‘I’m excited for the world to finally know what Wicked really is’
Man charged over grabbing Ariana Grande at Singapore Wicked premiere
MOST READ
World Cup playoffs: Who are Ireland’s potential opponents and when is the draw?
‘Veil of deep sadness’: Five people killed in Co Louth crash named
First class honours for Catherine Connolly for her ‘astounding’ Irish grammar
Pandemonium in the commentary box as the miracle at Budapest unfolded
Troy Parrott: Ireland’s almost-forgotten man finally earns his spurs
LATEST STORIES
In a Word...Comedy
60% of Black Friday shoppers later regret their purchases
AIB raises Irish economic forecasts amid resilience to tariffs and uncertainty
Irish family businesses have more ambitious growth plans than global average, survey finds
Troy Parrott: Ireland’s almost-forgotten man finally earns his spurs
Book Club

Sign up to the Irish Times books newsletter for features, podcasts and more

Sign up
Opens in new window
Opens in new window
Subscribe
Why Subscribe?
Subscription Bundles
Subscriber Rewards
Student Subscription
Subscription Help Centre
Opens in new window
Home Delivery
Opens in new window
Support
Contact Us
Help Centre
Opens in new window
My Account
About Us
Advertise
Contact Us
The Irish Times Trust
Careers
Irish Times Products & Services
ePaper
Crosswords & puzzles
Newspaper Archive
Newsletters
Article Index
Opens in new window
Discount Codes
Opens in new window
OUR PARTNERS:
MyHome.ie
Opens in new window
The Gloss
Opens in new window
Recruit Ireland
Opens in new window
RIP.ie
Opens in new window
Irish Times on WhatsApp
Irish Times on Facebook
Irish Times on X
Irish Times on LinkedIn
Irish Times on Instagram
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Information
Cookie Settings
Community Standards
Copyright

© 2025 The Irish Times DAC