URL: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-front-row/ballerina-leaps-into-john-wicks-bloody-world
Title: “Ballerina” Leaps Into John Wick’s Bloody World | The New Yorker

Skip to main content
Newsletter
Sign In
Search
The Latest
News
Books & Culture
Fiction & Poetry
Humor & Cartoons
Magazine
Puzzles & Games
Video
Podcasts
Goings On
Shop
100th Anniversary
The Front Row
“Ballerina” Leaps Into John Wick’s Bloody World
Ana de Armas energizes this turbulent but thinned-out spinoff from the Keanu Reeves martial-arts franchise.
By Richard Brody
June 5, 2025
Ana de Armas stars in “Ballerina,” an unthrilling action film set in the John Wick cinematic universe.Photograph by Murray Close / Lionsgate

It’s been instructive to see “Ballerina,” which opens this week, so soon after the new “Mission: Impossible” installment. In the latter, it’s hard to top Tom Cruise’s intrepid stunt work, which reaches its zenith in a pair of extended sequences (one in a submarine, the other on biplanes), but the story, involving a diabolical scheme using A.I. to commandeer and launch the world’s nuclear weaponry, is a mere pretext. Going to “Mission: Impossible” for the story is like going to Casablanca for the waters. In contrast, “Ballerina”—like the four John Wick films that it’s spun off from—is, strangely, far better at story than at action.

The first John Wick film is the weakest, because the framework for the franchise was still unformed: a retired hit man (Keanu Reeves) gets back into action to respond to a mobster’s attacks. Only a handful of touches—involving the Continental, a luxurious Manhattan hotel-cum-hideout—suggest the world-building mythology that has given the series, at its best, its kicks. The world thus built centers on an international organized-crime and contract-killing syndicate called the Ruska Roma, which has its own complex bureaucracy, elaborate rules, history, and even its own anachronistic technology and design. This world-building energizes the films because, unlike comic-book universes, the Wickiverse has chillingly plausible points of contact with ordinary experience and daily life. Its stakes aren’t asserted but felt.

“Ballerina” extends that legend into new territory, but, in so doing, stretches the matter thin. The new film’s Wick-ed connection is suggested from the start: a girl named Eve Macarro (played as a child by Victoria Comte) witnesses the murder of her father (David Castañeda), himself a killer, by a team of assassins and its a grandiloquent and refined leader, who has accused him of breaking the organization’s rules. Then, the similarly suave Winston (Ian MacShane), the manager of the Continental (who has figured prominently in all four of the John Wick extravaganzas) takes the orphaned child (whose mother had previously been killed) under his wing, bringing her into a so-called family. A dozen years later, that home is revealed to be a grandiose Ruska Roma residence where Eve (played as an adult by Ana de Armas) is studying ballet under the strict tutelage of the organization’s Director (Anjelica Huston) and mastering the deadly arts under a series of teachers likewise under the Director’s rule.

Readied for her hit-woman career, Eve is sent to protect a young woman from kidnapping. The resulting set piece has a calculated air of cool—indeed, of cold, being set in a night club where the dance floor is icy—and it results in a carnival of death and grotesque injury. In the process, Eve sees a scar on a dead henchman’s wrist that reminds her of one of her father’s killers, and—dumping the limb, severed, on the Director’s desk—demands information. The Director informs her that the scar is the mark of a rival group of killers with which the Ruska Roma maintains a permanent mutual pact of nonaggression, and orders Eve to stand down. The group—referred to as a tribe—is said to outdo the Ruska Roma in its ruthlessness, but Eve is not to be deterred. With information from Winston, she heads to Prague in pursuit of her father’s killer. There, mayhem ensues. Defying her handlers, she tracks the group to an Austrian mountain village called Hallstatt, which becomes the site of yet more mayhem.

“Ballerina” is officially an offshoot of “John Wick 3: Parabellum,” which is to say that its story is firmly ensconced in the cycle’s Ruska Roma mythology. There’s something dubious about this mythology—why has a real-life, much oppressed ethnicity been made cinematically synonymous with a league of contract killers?—but its development, nonetheless, has been engrossing by dint of its complexity. The Continental isn’t just one hotel—it’s an international chain, all under Ruska Roma rule, and the hotels’ extremes of luxury and rarefied service almost become characters in themselves, potent incarnations of the corporatized power of murder. (The deadly ways of plutocratic power are also concealed behind the elegance of high culture, as the very title of “Ballerina” and its protagonist’s early training suggest.) The veneer of frictionless welcomes and lofty manners, of fine furnishings and cossetting comforts, suggests an impersonal mechanism of deadly decision-making that conceals itself under contractual responsibilities and rules-based procedures. Winston’s mantra is that one always has a choice, but the entire mechanism of the Ruska Roma is anchored in a quasi-military order that obliterates choice and in which consequences are automatic.

The choices that do exist come in the gray zone of danger, the shadowy margins of mandated action—the equivalent of instant battlefield improvisations under fire. These quietly decisive moments on which the mega-battles depend provide the series with the closest thing it has to intimacy. What gives them their narrative charge is the greatest dramatic inspiration of the series—the Ruska Roma’s paranoia-stoking surveillance regime. Although the bureaucracy of the Ruska Roma follows ancient traditions and runs on old-fashioned analog technology (including a switchboard and pneumatic tubes), its power involves a network of secret agents who are seemingly ubiquitous, not only melting undetectably into crowds but even forming some of those seemingly ordinary crowds.

In “Ballerina,” such chilling excitements figure only glancingly, as when hotel guests and townspeople are enmeshed in the tumult. The new movie’s emphasis lies elsewhere: in the establishment of the character of Eve and her confirmation as an action heroine. As if to give Eve battle cred, “Ballerina” plays at times like weapon porn, the camera rapturously gazing at her armamentarium, which includes a wide variety of high-tech firearms along with hand grenades and flamethrowers, and which yields a high degree of gore. The movie, with its more primal sense of violence, also evokes a more primal sense of belonging: in lieu of previous installments’ elaborate quasi-feudal negotiations of the intersyndicate council the High Table, “Ballerina” offers various and sentimental visions of family bonds that take surprising forms.

“Ballerina” is the first movie in the series that’s not directed by the franchise co-creator Chad Stahelski (who’s a former stunt performer); it’s directed by Len Wiseman (with some reshoots by Stahelski), but its action scenes are no less elaborate than those of its predecessors. Yet, though action scenes are the crux of the cycle, they have rarely been more than functional, and that largely holds true in “Ballerina,” too. In the John Wick films, Reeves has become an accomplished actioneer, but the role fits him like a costume, not like a second skin, and that’s equally true of de Armas, who is a purposeful and determined presence nonetheless, in a role that is written to stint on characterization and makes charisma count more than performance. The action sequences in all five films feel more designed than performed, and it’s notable that the most engrossing fight scenes in the series are the ones featuring Donnie Yen, in “John Wick: Chapter 4,” because Yen is a veteran martial-arts actor (and director), and because the role he plays there—a blind assassin—has a theatrical lilt that inflects his performance. Still, direction counts, too, and here it’s rarely at the level of the onscreen exertions that it captures. In “Ballerina,” a single wide shot of Eve, gyrating in silhouette in front of a raging fire as she hacks up a half-dozen assailants with a long sword that she found on site, has more cinematic identity and kinetic delight than the rest of the movie.

If the Wick films rarely supply the spectacular thrills of the “Mission: Impossible” ones, it’s worth noting that both series—and, for that matter, the James Bond franchise—lack a key ingredient of tension. What they are missing is airports, passport controls, luggage and customs, taxis and restaurants and pharmacies, and all the other workaday complications of international flitting-about that would make the movies’ preternaturally gifted but all-too-human superheroes stand out more dramatically from more modest members of the species. That’s why genre films get no respect: not because they’re gaudily sensational but because they’re missing the practicalities that can make impossibilities seem all the more impressive, missing the ordinariness that would give their wondrous characters detailed definition. The John Wick quintet is better than “Anora” at conjuring the velvet-gloved menace of the international oligarchy—but “Anora” has the airplane. ♦

New Yorker Favorites

In the weeks before John Wayne Gacy’s scheduled execution, he was far from reconciled to his fate.

What HBO’s “Chernobyl” got right, and what it got terribly wrong.

Why does the Bible end that way?

A new era of strength competitions is testing the limits of the human body.

How an unemployed blogger confirmed that Syria had used chemical weapons.

An essay by Toni Morrison: “The Work You Do, the Person You Are.”

Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.

Richard Brody, a film critic, began writing for The New Yorker in 1999. He is the author of “Everything Is Cinema: The Working Life of Jean-Luc Godard.”
More:
Action Movies
Spinoffs
Sequels
Movie Reviews
Film
Read More
The Front Row
“Springsteen: Deliver Me from Nowhere” Tamps the Boss Down
Scott Cooper’s tightly focussed bio-pic, about the making of Bruce Springsteen’s D.I.Y. album “Nebraska,” leaves out the wide-ranging passion that went into the music.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Fire of Wind” Is a Bold and Inspired Début
The first feature by the Portuguese filmmaker Marta Mateus, featuring nonprofessional actors in natural settings, explores and expands modern traditions of political cinema.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
The Joyful Mythology of “Nouvelle Vague”
Richard Linklater’s dramatization of Jean-Luc Godard’s making of “Breathless” embraces the legend of the French New Wave and its enduring influence.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
“Sirāt” Is a Harrowing, Exhilarating Dance of Death
In Oliver Laxe’s desert thriller, an intensely agonizing journey reveals both the pitiless nature of fate and the stubborn persistence of compassion.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
The Bad Show-Biz Dads of “Sentimental Value” and “Jay Kelly”
In new films from Joachim Trier and Noah Baumbach, success in filmmaking proves depressingly incompatible with success in fatherhood.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Peter Hujar’s Day” Gives the Past a New Life
Ira Sachs’s film, starring Ben Whishaw as the renowned photographer and Rebecca Hall as his interviewer, is a personal memorial for the protagonist and his milieu.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
In Guillermo del Toro’s “Frankenstein,” a Vast Vision Gets Netflixed Down to Size
The latest reanimation of Mary Shelley’s classic tale, starring Oscar Isaac and Jacob Elordi, is a labyrinthine tour of a filmmaker’s career-long obsessions.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
Emma Stone’s Apocalyptic Showdown Blooms in “Bugonia”
In Yorgos Lanthimos’s film, ripe with eco-paranoia, the actress and Jesse Plemons come to physical and psychological blows.
By Justin Chang
Profiles
Joachim Trier Has Put Oslo on the Cinematic Map
His new film, “Sentimental Value,” is another intimate character study set in the Norwegian capital. His approach to directing is as empathic as his films.
By Margaret Talbot
The Front Row
“Die My Love” Is Smaller Than Life
Jennifer Lawrence and Robert Pattinson exert themselves strenuously to give this fervent drama of marriage and motherhood a semblance of reality.
By Richard Brody
Screening Room
The Dream of Finishing One’s To-Do List in “Retirement Plan”
In John Kelly’s animated short film, narrated by Domhnall Gleeson, nothing’s off limits when it comes to thinking about the future—particularly when there’s so much left to do.
By David Sedaris
Onward and Upward with the Arts
Rian Johnson Is an Agatha Christie for the Netflix Age
The director revived the cozy mystery with “Knives Out.” In a new sequel, can he find his way to the end of the maze?
By Anna Russell

Sections

NewsBooks & CultureFiction & PoetryHumor & CartoonsMagazineCrosswordVideoPodcasts100th AnniversaryGoings On

More

Manage AccountShop The New YorkerBuy Covers and CartoonsCondé Nast StoreDigital AccessNewslettersJigsaw PuzzleRSSSite Map
AboutCareersContactF.A.Q.Media KitPressAccessibility HelpUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy Rights

© 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices

Your Privacy Choices