URL: https://www.theguardian.com/film/2023/nov/02/bottoms-review-queer-high-school-comedy-from-the-makers-of-shiva-baby
Title: Bottoms review – queer high-school loser comedy offers big laughs and delirious silliness | Movies | The Guardian

Skip to main content
Skip to navigation
Skip to navigation
Print subscriptions
Newsletters
Sign in
US
The Guardian - Back to home
The Guardian
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more
Film
Books
Music
Art & design
TV & radio
Stage
Classical
Games
View image in fullscreen
Always funny … Rachel Sennott (left) and Ayo Edebiri in Bottoms. Photograph: Orion Pictures
Movies
 This article is more than 2 years old
Review
Bottoms review – queer high-school loser comedy offers big laughs and delirious silliness
This article is more than 2 years old

Rachel Sennott and The Bear’s Ayo Edebiri are excellent as gay teens who set up a fight club in order to win the affections of their school cheerleaders

Peter Bradshaw
Thu 2 Nov 2023 03.00 EDT
Share

T
here are a lot of laughs, a great deal of delirious silliness and what I must insist is a cinephile reference to Orson Welles’s Touch of Evil in this very funny high-school comedy from director Emma Seligman, and starring her co-writer Rachel Sennott, who last worked with Seligman on her debut feature Shiva Baby. Bottoms is about two gay teen girls and bickering best friends who want to get some sexual experience and it all plays like a moderately scuffed-up and entirely non-heterosexual version of Olivia Wilde’s Booksmart – though no one in this film shows the smallest interest in books, certainly not the teachers.

PJ (Sennott) and Josie (Ayo Edebiri) hang out, obsessing in a self-harming and masochistic way about the two gorgeous and evidently straight cheerleaders Isabel (Havana Rose Liu) and Brittany (Kaia Gerber) with whom they are tragically in love. But when Josie accidentally touches the knee of the star quarterback with her car, and he reacts like a whingeing diva, PJ and Josie get a completely undeserved reputation for being aggressive badasses. They start a self-defence “fight club” whose first rule is to talk self-admiringly about their club all the time – because they figure it will be seen as a radically feminist empowering association which Isabel and Brittany will want to join. But before that happens, their club is dominated by their fellow losers, including explosives enthusiast Hazel (Ruby Cruz), one of whose detonations coincides with an important kiss.

Bottoms is actually a bizarrely violent film, and its plot is always teetering on the brink of pure incoherence, but it’s always funny, thanks to the goofy and winning comic presences of Sennott and Edebiri; football star turned actor Marshawn Lynch is amusing as their indulgent, sexist teacher Mr G; while the “bomb attack” sequence to the accompaniment of Bonnie Tyler’s Total Eclipse of the Heart is glorious. As for Seligman and Sennott, in the words (almost) of Cole Porter, they’re the tops.

 Bottoms is released on 3 November in UK and Irish cinemas, and on 30 November in Australia.

Explore more on these topics
Film
Comedy films
Comedy
Sexuality
reviews
Share
Reuse this content
Comments (…)
Sign in or create your Guardian account to join the discussion
Most viewed
Film
Books
Music
Art & design
TV & radio
Stage
Classical
Games
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
Contact us
Tip us off
SecureDrop
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Tax strategy
Terms & conditions
All topics
All writers
Newsletters
Digital newspaper archive
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Threads
TikTok
YouTube
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Work for us
Accessibility settings
 
Back to top
© 2025 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)