URL: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-front-row/caught-stealing-makes-new-york-a-comedic-criminal-nightmare
Title: “Caught Stealing” Makes New York a Comedic Criminal Nightmare | The New Yorker

Skip to main content
Newsletter
Sign In
Search
The Latest
News
Books & Culture
Fiction & Poetry
Humor & Cartoons
Magazine
Puzzles & Games
Video
Podcasts
Goings On
Shop
100th Anniversary
The Front Row
“Caught Stealing” Makes New York a Comedic Criminal Nightmare
Darren Aronofsky brings philosophical heft to his violent and frantic neo-noir, starring Austin Butler as a bartender trapped in a vortex of danger.
By Richard Brody
August 28, 2025
Liev Schreiber, Austin Butler, and Vincent D’Onofrio in “Caught Stealing.”Photograph by Niko Tavernise / Sony Pictures

From the start of Darren Aronofsky’s new film, “Caught Stealing,” it’s apparent that it hits the sweet spot of his cinematic artistry—the right scale, the right scope. Set in the summer of 1998, almost entirely in New York City, the movie begins in a Lower East Side bar at 4 a.m., where the bartender, Hank Thompson (Austin Butler), is dealing with a raucous group that’s breaking an absurd law—by dancing—and reminds them that Rudolph Giuliani, the zero-tolerance mayor, is indeed enforcing it. (It was a real thing; the last of the relevant laws was repealed only last year.) The film starts small, in a tight space, but the thrum of the city—its physical energy and its mighty administrative infrastructure—gives it a tension, a sense of ambient conflict that will, soon enough, turn an ordinary night into a neo-noir nightmare.

For Aronofsky, size matters, because one of the constants of his career is the conflict between order and chaos, a struggle for rational solutions to irrational realities. Too big (“Noah”) or too small (“The Whale”) or just erratic (“Mother!”) and that conflict becomes either unbalanced or unengaging. “Caught Stealing,” based on a novel by Charlie Huston (who also wrote the screenplay), nearly matches Aronofsky’s finest dramas of disorder and control, “Black Swan” and “The Wrestler,” especially in the way that it maps private lives onto public spaces. In Aronofsky’s cinematic universe, the ability to endure physical punishment functions as a touchstone for power, and, in his best work, torment takes on an intensely intimate dimension, creating extreme contrast with the larger dramatic landscape on which the action is stretched. “Black Swan” and “The Wrestler” both twist documentary realities and hallucinatory dangers into large-scale tangles as terrifying as they are psychologically revealing.

But “Caught Stealing” is bracingly different from those two peaks of Aronofsky’s career—their hot-blooded melodrama is replaced by lacerating comedy and high-relief artifice. A simple synopsis: Hank gets in big trouble, and causes others even bigger trouble, by the trivial decency of helping out a neighbor. After he closes up the bar for the night, he and his girlfriend, a paramedic named Yvonne (Zoë Kravitz), head to his apartment but are waylaid by Russ (Matt Smith), a mohawk-sporting British punk who lives across the hall. Russ is in a state of panic: he has to leave for London immediately, he explains, because his father has had a stroke, and he presses Hank to take care of his cat for a while. The next day, a pair of Russian gangsters, a tall one named Aleksei (Yuri Kolokolnikov) and a short one nicknamed Microbe (Nikita Kukushkin), come by looking for Russ and beat Hank nearly to death. In the hospital, Hank gets a visit from a police officer, Elise Roman (Regina King), but he’s still reeling and in no state to talk. That changes once he’s out of the hospital—lacking insurance, he ducks out before he’s fully recovered—and gets a threatening visit from the brutes. He calls Elise (or Roman, as everyone refers to her), and, as he spills what little he knows, she explains that Russ is a major drug dealer. What’s more, it soon becomes clear that making that call doesn’t shield him from danger but opens an ever-deepening vortex of chaos. The movie’s MacGuffin is a key that Russ had hidden and that Hank finds. To force him to hand it over, all the movie’s miscreants—headed by a pair of ultra-Orthodox Jewish brothers, Lipa (Liev Schreiber) and Shmully (Vincent D’Onofrio)—subject Hank to relentless rounds of physical and emotional torture.

A profusion of visual details and verbal touches highlight the grungy textures of a city still raw with the process of gentrification. The cast rattles off the snappy dialogue, jagged with tension and menace, in performances that wink just slyly enough at the wry, knowing way that the characters deploy—and embody—gangland stereotypes. Similarly, a combination of sharp-eyed location shooting and highly decorative production design makes recognizable places throughout the city, including downtown Manhattan, Coney Island, Brighton Beach, and Flushing Meadows Park, look like movie sets just waiting to be filled with horrific violence. In short, Aronofsky has it both ways, and for a cinematically effective reason: the movie is, at times, cartoonlike, because its pain is nearly unbearably authentic.

Hank, who grew up in California and has been in New York for eleven years, has a tragic backstory, which emerges, initially, in nightmares. A baseball star in his late teens, he expected to be drafted by a major-league team when, while driving, he caused a car crash that shattered him physically and also killed a close friend (D’Pharaoh Woon-A-Tai). His traumatic memories are heightened by the guilty knowledge that, at the time, it was the career he grieved more intensely. He remains baseball-obsessed, and, as his troubles spiral, his team, the San Francisco Giants, is battling the Mets for a playoff spot. He calls his mother daily to talk baseball; he also sends her money. His romance with Yvonne is sexy and playful, and she sweetly indulges his absurdly laddish ways: his fridge is filled with beer (he drinks one on awaking, his so-called breakfast of champions); the rest of the apartment is cluttered with open bottles, empty or not. But in venting his bitterness about the distance between the life he’d dreamed of and his current predicament, he unintentionally pushes Yvonne away. To make things worse, his pursuers, who also include a dealer called Colorado (Bad Bunny), vow to harm her and Hank’s mother if he doesn’t coöperate.

For Aronofsky, the city’s ethnic blend has no special claim on virtue; there seem to be as many criminal underworlds as there are demographic groups. Hank, in attempting to save himself, starts to act out a stereotype of his own, the Western loner who presumes to take on a hero’s mantle. Driven by a mix of stubbornness, pride, feral self-preservation, rage, and fear, he takes matters into his own hands—and, by insisting on doing things his way, he makes them immeasurably worse, in ways that he never imagined. Hank proves extraordinarily resourceful under mortal pressure but not resourceful enough—the bodies pile up. The ironies of his existence, and of existence at large, resound all the more clearly thanks to the presence of the two devout brothers, Lipa and Shmully: they apostrophize their brutalities in philosophical antiphons (“Sad world,” “Broken world”) and, while making mayhem on a Friday afternoon, just hours before sunset and the start of the Sabbath, they insist on delivering a challah to their grandmother (Carol Kane). After they unleash apocalyptic violence past sundown, they force Hank, who’s been unwilling to drive ever since his accident, to take the wheel. As one brother says, “We’re in enough trouble with Hashem already without driving on Shabbos.”

Whereas “Black Swan” and “The Wrestler” gained power from the audience’s total identification with tragic protagonists, “Caught Stealing” offers the rueful uncertainty of identification with a terminal fuckup. Hank, having already experienced life-changing failure, is also able to absorb beatings that would destroy most people, endure the agony, and leap back into action. Even as Hank’s wild-loner act wreaks havoc, Butler endows the character with abraded boyish charm, and this gap between affect and effect—notable also in the way that confidence-inspiring characters turn out to be among the worst villains—brings a sardonic, radically cynical edge to the story’s exciting, hectic pivots. “Caught Stealing” is laced with plenty of antic silliness, such as a nerdy neighbor named Duane (George Abud) whose plaintive declaration “I build websites” becomes a mocking refrain. Microbe, like a reject from a Quentin Tarantino film, continually dispenses fractured pop-culture clichés as he metes out violence. But the film’s oddball characters inhabit a genuinely frightening city, populated by hair-trigger survivalists and mutely terrified witnesses to horror. The brazen goofiness is applied to the movie’s howl of terror like smiley-face stickers on a gravestone.

What separates “Caught Stealing” from the very best of Aronofsky’s work is its image-making, which is rarely more than just functional. The cinematographer, Matthew Libatique, plunges into the tumult with avidity and precision. But there’s nothing here to rival “Black Swan” in its fixation on mirrors and eyes, nothing to match the pathos-laden closeups and the postindustrial palette of “The Wrestler.” Everything is moving too fast to be fixed in place with authoritative framings, and the action is so jittery and impulsive that it allows scant leeway for reflective moments; the foregrounded turmoil remains psychologically opaque. Those earlier movies were rich in natural symbols—dramatic elements that inspired images rich in philosophical overtones. The new one has none of that. Then again, the artifice of the film’s tone isn’t built for reflection, anyway, and its symbols aren’t found in any individual images but in the whole rollickingly monstrous shebang. “Caught Stealing” is a grand entertainment for a time of shame and guilt and corruption, of treacherous authority and brazen hypocrisy. ♦

New Yorker Favorites

In the weeks before John Wayne Gacy’s scheduled execution, he was far from reconciled to his fate.

What HBO’s “Chernobyl” got right, and what it got terribly wrong.

Why does the Bible end that way?

A new era of strength competitions is testing the limits of the human body.

How an unemployed blogger confirmed that Syria had used chemical weapons.

An essay by Toni Morrison: “The Work You Do, the Person You Are.”

Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.

Richard Brody, a film critic, began writing for The New Yorker in 1999. He is the author of “Everything Is Cinema: The Working Life of Jean-Luc Godard.”
More:
Darren Aronofsky
Movie Reviews
Films
Read More
The Front Row
The Joyful Mythology of “Nouvelle Vague”
Richard Linklater’s dramatization of Jean-Luc Godard’s making of “Breathless” embraces the legend of the French New Wave and its enduring influence.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Fire of Wind” Is a Bold and Inspired Début
The first feature by the Portuguese filmmaker Marta Mateus, featuring nonprofessional actors in natural settings, explores and expands modern traditions of political cinema.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Springsteen: Deliver Me from Nowhere” Tamps the Boss Down
Scott Cooper’s tightly focussed bio-pic, about the making of Bruce Springsteen’s D.I.Y. album “Nebraska,” leaves out the wide-ranging passion that went into the music.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
In Guillermo del Toro’s “Frankenstein,” a Vast Vision Gets Netflixed Down to Size
The latest reanimation of Mary Shelley’s classic tale, starring Oscar Isaac and Jacob Elordi, is a labyrinthine tour of a filmmaker’s career-long obsessions.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Peter Hujar’s Day” Gives the Past a New Life
Ira Sachs’s film, starring Ben Whishaw as the renowned photographer and Rebecca Hall as his interviewer, is a personal memorial for the protagonist and his milieu.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
“Sirāt” Is a Harrowing, Exhilarating Dance of Death
In Oliver Laxe’s desert thriller, an intensely agonizing journey reveals both the pitiless nature of fate and the stubborn persistence of compassion.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
Emma Stone’s Apocalyptic Showdown Blooms in “Bugonia”
In Yorgos Lanthimos’s film, ripe with eco-paranoia, the actress and Jesse Plemons come to physical and psychological blows.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
The Bad Show-Biz Dads of “Sentimental Value” and “Jay Kelly”
In new films from Joachim Trier and Noah Baumbach, success in filmmaking proves depressingly incompatible with success in fatherhood.
By Justin Chang
Profiles
Joachim Trier Has Put Oslo on the Cinematic Map
His new film, “Sentimental Value,” is another intimate character study set in the Norwegian capital. His approach to directing is as empathic as his films.
By Margaret Talbot
The Front Row
“Die My Love” Is Smaller Than Life
Jennifer Lawrence and Robert Pattinson exert themselves strenuously to give this fervent drama of marriage and motherhood a semblance of reality.
By Richard Brody
Onward and Upward with the Arts
Rian Johnson Is an Agatha Christie for the Netflix Age
The director revived the cozy mystery with “Knives Out.” In a new sequel, can he find his way to the end of the maze?
By Anna Russell
Screening Room
The Dream of Finishing One’s To-Do List in “Retirement Plan”
In John Kelly’s animated short film, narrated by Domhnall Gleeson, nothing’s off limits when it comes to thinking about the future—particularly when there’s so much left to do.
By David Sedaris

Sections

NewsBooks & CultureFiction & PoetryHumor & CartoonsMagazineCrosswordVideoPodcasts100th AnniversaryGoings On

More

Manage AccountShop The New YorkerBuy Covers and CartoonsCondé Nast StoreDigital AccessNewslettersJigsaw PuzzleRSSSite Map
AboutCareersContactF.A.Q.Media KitPressAccessibility HelpUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy Rights

© 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices

Your Privacy Choices