URL: https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/christy-sydney-sweeney-film-review-2025
Title: Christy movie review & film summary (2025) | Roger Ebert

SIGNUP
Search in https://www.rogerebert.com
MOVIE REVIEWS
GREAT MOVIES
TV/STREAMING
INTERVIEWS
COLLECTIONS
FESTIVALS & AWARDS
CONTRIBUTORS

Reviews

Christy
DRAMA
135 minutes ‧ R ‧ 2025
Christy Lemire
November 7, 2025
4 min read

Christy Martin overcame meager beginnings, disapproving parents, an abusive marriage, and the self-loathing of the closet to emerge as a trailblazing figure in women’s boxing. But “Christy,” the movie about her life, takes no such risks.  

Sydney Sweeney gives her all in what is ultimately a formulaic, underdog sports movie. She subsumes her blonde, blue-eyed beauty beneath a brunette mullet and brown contacts to recreate Martin’s look as she rose to stardom in the ‘90s. (Extra special kudos to costume designer Christina Flannery for finding a wide variety of hideous floral prints for the character to wear in an effort to appear feminine.) The star of “Euphoria” and “Anyone But You” glammed down and bulked up for her most demanding role yet, and rose to the physical and emotional challenges of playing this tough but troubled fighter. 

But director David Michôd’s film, which he co-wrote with his wife, Mirrah Foulkes, hits all the beats you’d expect as it follows Martin’s ascent to boxing greatness. There are training montages and needle drops, victories and setbacks, doubters and champions. All of it is done capably but without much panache; worst of all, the boxing sequences feel rudimentary, lacking both artistry and savagery. Only in the film’s harrowing third act do we see the kind of startling storytelling Michôd has made his name with in films like “Animal Kingdom.” 

“Christy” begins in 1989 in Martin’s working-class, West Virginia home. In an opening voiceover, she informs us she’s been told she fights like she has demons in her. A major one seems to be that she’s a lesbian, but rampant homophobia prevents her from coming out. As her mom, Merritt Wever is stuck in a one-note role with slight variations of the same judgmental dialogue: “What you’re doing isn’t normal!” she scolds upon learning of Christy’s close relationship with a young woman named Rosie (Jess Gabor). 

A chance to fight in Bristol, Tennessee, sets her on her course and reveals her calling. (The production design of both the shabby trailer here and the rundown apartment she’ll move to in Florida efficiently creates a grim mood.) But she doesn’t realize what she’s gotten herself into when she starts training with the man who will become her husband, Jim Martin. She’s 22; he’s 47. And he’s played by an unrecognizable Ben Foster with a belly and a bad comb-over. Obviously jealous and insecure—but possessing more power than she has in this situation—he dresses her in pink and tells her to grow her hair long.  

“Nobody wants to see a butch girl fight,” he sneers. But he also promises: “I can make you the greatest female fighter in the world.” (Her quick-witted retort: “Compared to who?”) He manipulates and isolates her, controls and cajoles, and Foster is so good, as always, at creating an undercurrent of danger.  

Still, Christy giddily celebrates each new knockout, jumping up and down like a little kid, thrusting her fists in the air, and watching her find her swagger is the film’s one joy. By 1996, she’s charming fight promoter Don King (Chad Coleman) and wowing Las Vegas on a Mike Tyson undercard, but by 2003, she’s outmatched against a much bigger and stronger Laila Ali. And Jim has gone from passive-aggressive to straight-up aggressive in his treatment of her. 

The one bright spot is the connection Christy forges with Lisa Holewyne, the former opponent Jim brings in to help train her for the Ali bout. “Love Lies Bleeding” star Katy O’Brian is so compelling in just a few scenes that you’ll wish desperately there were more of her, particularly given the obvious chemistry between these two women. 

But this story must get worse before it gets better. What Martin endures in the film’s violent climax is extremely difficult to watch, but it’s also part of a conclusion that feels overly drawn out. There’s no reason this movie should be two hours and 15 minutes long, particularly when it feels so frustratingly superficial. Why does she fight? Because she’s good at it, apparently, but that doesn’t seem like enough. In the end, “Christy” never hits as hard as Christy does. 

Now streaming on:

Powered by
Tweet
Share
Share
Pin
Christy Lemire

Christy Lemire is a longtime film critic who has written for RogerEbert.com since 2013. Before that, she was the film critic for The Associated Press for nearly 15 years and co-hosted the public television series “Ebert Presents At the Movies” opposite Ignatiy Vishnevetsky, with Roger Ebert serving as managing editor. Read her answers to our Movie Love Questionnaire here.

Christy
DRAMA
135 minutes ‧ R ‧ 2025
Cast
Sydney Sweeney as Christy Martin
Ben Foster as James V. Martin
Merritt Wever as Joyce Salters
Katy O’Brian as Lisa Holewyne
Ethan Embry as John Salters
Jess Gabor as Sherry Lusk
Director
David Michod
Writer
David Michod
Mirrah Foulkes
Leave a comment
Now playing
Now You See Me: Now You Don’t
Matt Zoller Seitz
The American Revolution
Brian Tallerico
Keeper (2025)
Zachary Lee
The Carpenter’s Son
Peter Sobczynski
Latest articles
TV/STREAMING
Amazon Prime’s “Malice” Will Only Make You Mad
3 days ago
INTERVIEWS
We Live in Time: Joachim Trier on “Sentimental Value”
3 days ago
TV/STREAMING
“Landman” Might Be the Dumbest Fracking Show on TV
3 days ago
INTERVIEWS
It’s Important for a Film to Wake an Audience Up: Ira Sachs on “Peter Hujar’s Day”
3 days ago
The best movie reviews, in your inbox
Movie Reviews
Roger’s Greatest Movies
All Reviews
Cast and Crew
Ebert Prime
Sign Up
Movie Genres
Action
Amazon Prime
Comedy
Documentary
Drama
Horror
Hulu
Mystery
Netflix
Romance
Science Fiction
Suspense
Thriller
Blogs
Reviews
Chaz’s Journal
Great Movies
MZS
Far Flungers
Interviews
Tributes
Video Games
Black Writers Week
Features
TV/Streaming
Roger Ebert
Festivals & Awards
Ebert Co.
About the site
Contact us
Advertise with us
Contributors
“Roger Ebert Loved Movies”
In Memoriam 1942 - 2013
Ebert Digital LLC © Copyright 2025
Terms of use
Privacy Policy