URL: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-current-cinema/eden-review-ron-howard-jude-law-vanessa-kirby
Title: “Eden” Is a Desert-Island Thriller That Despoils Itself | The New Yorker

Skip to main content
Newsletter
Sign In
Search
The Latest
News
Books & Culture
Fiction & Poetry
Humor & Cartoons
Magazine
Puzzles & Games
Video
Podcasts
Goings On
Shop
100th Anniversary
The Current Cinema
“Eden” Is a Desert-Island Thriller That Despoils Itself
In Ron Howard’s historical potboiler, an off-the-grid social experiment veers clumsily—but sometimes compellingly—into “Lord of the Flies” terrain.
By Justin Chang
August 26, 2025
Photograph from Jasin Boland / Vertical

The new movie “Eden” features bursts of foul temper, wild sex, grisly violence, and nihilist ideology—a departure, you might say, for Ron Howard, a director whose cinematic disposition can be sunny to the point of sanitization. In a more literal sense, though, the film might be understood as only the latest of his departures to distant places and times. In dramatizing a series of mysterious disappearances that occurred nearly a century ago on an inhospitable island in the Galápagos archipelago, Howard has given us another journey into fact-based, far-flung peril—a picture to file alongside his earlier “Apollo 13” (1995), “In the Heart of the Sea” (2015), and “Thirteen Lives” (2022). Dare we add to the list the much-maligned “Hillbilly Elegy” (2020), which built a different kind of survival story—and cast an unsteady, faintly exoticizing gaze—on the abuses and privations of J. D. Vance’s Rust Belt childhood? “Eden” is a schlocky hoot, but it does offer, if nothing else, a departure from all that. If I were accused of enabling Vance’s political ascent, I might make a beeline for the equator myself.

At least four settlers on the Galápagos island of Floreana vanished or died in the early nineteen-thirties, under circumstances that were contested long afterward among some of the survivors. A 2014 documentary, “The Galápagos Affair: Satan Came to Eden,” gave the subjects’ written accounts a scrupulous airing, letting the settlers tell their stories in their own often conflicting words. “Eden,” which was written by Noah Pink (“Tetris”), begins in 1929, with the Great Depression in the background and drastic life-style reassessments under way. Floreana will soon receive its first human inhabitants in some time, a ruggedly idealistic German couple—Dr. Friedrich Ritter, a physician turned philosopher, and Dore Strauch, his patient turned partner—who have fled the alleged moral and spiritual (to say nothing of financial) bankruptcy of civilized society.

Friedrich and Dore are played by Jude Law and Vanessa Kirby, who, even with dirt-caked, sun-scorched faces, ooze movie-star hauteur. And why not? The First Couple of Floreana may be off the grid, but they are also international celebrities. Friedrich’s letters, which are picked up by boats that occasionally pass through, are eagerly published in European newspapers, and word soon spreads of the life that the couple have built for themselves, complete with a vegetable garden, a prized burro, some chickens, and an innovative shower setup, making the most of the island’s meagre water supply. But, if Friedrich and Dore are committed isolationists, they also have delusions of revolutionary grandeur. Friedrich is writing a manuscript that he hopes will change the course of humanity, though what we hear of it sounds like hackish regurgitations of Nietzsche. The couple also hopes that the island air will prove restorative for Dore, who has multiple sclerosis.

Dore is not the only settler keen to tap into Floreana’s healing powers. In the winter of 1932, another German couple—Heinz Wittmer (Daniel Brühl) and his young wife, Margret (Sydney Sweeney)—arrive on the island with Harry (Jonathan Tittel), Heinz’s teen-age son from a previous marriage, who is recovering from tuberculosis. The Wittmers are adventurous, good-natured, and eager to ingratiate themselves with their hosts. From the start, though, they are treated with barely disguised hostility. Rather than taking the newcomers in, Friedrich leads them to some distant caves and trusts that the miseries of island life—extreme heat, torrential rains, pesky insects, vicious dogs—will soon send them packing. He’s wrong. Heinz and Margret prove smarter and tougher than you’d guess from their Ned Flanders-on-safari demeanor, and vastly preferable to the next batch of island crashers headed their way. Enter a vampy Austrian aristocrat (Ana de Armas, going all in), who calls herself the Baroness Eloise Wehrborn de Wagner-Bosquet—a mouthful of a moniker, and should you doubt the exact pronunciation, I would not trust de Armas’s cheerfully itinerant accent to clear up the matter.

The Baroness has wildly improbable plans to build a luxury hotel on Floreana, and has brought along two hunky manservants—Rudy Lorenz (Felix Kammerer), an engineer, and Robert Phillipson (Toby Wallace), a bodyguard—for detailed consultations on the matter. Most of these are held in a tent, from which loud, ecstatic moans can be heard for seemingly miles around. Not to be outdone, Friedrich has an inscrutably bizarre sex life with Dore, and he nurtures an exhibitionist streak, first greeting the Baroness with what can only be described as naked aggression. Some viewers may experience flashbacks to the young Law in “The Talented Mr. Ripley” (1999), tanning himself on a beach chair like the most golden of golden boys. Striding around in the buff in “Eden,” Law looks older and grubbier, but that faint air of malevolent superiority hasn’t left him; if anything, it seems to have sunk in deep, withered, and putrefied under the hot sun.

There are moments when “Eden” resembles a particularly sour riff on one of Aesop’s fables. The Wittmers are the resourceful, hard-working ants: left to fend for themselves, they eventually have a cottage, a garden, a reservoir, a cow, and, against all odds, a healthy newborn son. (As the decent, uncomplaining young Margret, Sweeney delivers the film’s most credible performance, including a childbirth scene of absurd, awesomely animalistic intensity.) The Baroness is the grasshopper, though she isn’t just lazy but actively predatory; at one point, low on provisions, she orders her manly minions to break into the Wittmers’ cottage and raid their supply of canned goods. As for Friedrich and Dore, they are more like a third kind of arthropod—the lethally poisoned centipede that skitters into an early scene. Dore calls it a “goliath,” a name bestowed by Darwin himself, and warns Margret that “its sting can kill you.” Then, with a purr of satisfaction: “Everything on this island can kill you.”

But who will ultimately be killed, and by what—or whom? That question keeps you watching, even as the film traces an increasingly laborious descent into “Lord of the Flies” terrain. Its title notwithstanding, “Eden” is a drama of paradise despoiled. (The Genesis reference dates back to at least as early as 1931, when one of Ritter’s dispatches was published in The Atlantic under the headline “Adam and Eve in the Galapagos.”) The movie, to my eyes, badly miscalculates the ratio of paradise to despoilment, indulging the latter at the expense of the former. The film’s second half plays out as a protracted series of genre maneuvers, all strategic alliances and unsurprising betrayals, culminating in brutal if rote eruptions of violence: guns and knives come out, and even the livestock is weaponized. We yearn to know far more of what came in the beginning, to see with our own eyes how a bunch of would-be Robinson Crusoes set about taming their terrain. The glimpses we catch are tantalizing—the Wittmers ingeniously constructing a water conduit and marvelling at the sight of their first vegetables—but the rest is largely relegated to expository shorthand. The characters do the work; the movie doesn’t follow suit.

Howard’s own recent filmography suggests a better way. “Thirteen Lives,” inspired by the astonishing 2018 Thai cave rescue, was a patiently rendered and solidly suspenseful process drama in which the mechanics of the operation and the revelations of character intuitively nourished each other. It’s hard not to conclude that, in the case of “Eden,” Howard simply isn’t mean enough for this material. His temperament is better suited to stories of heroic resilience than ones of greed, bloodlust, and cynical isolationism. (His fine documentary “Rebuilding Paradise,” about the fallout from the deadly 2018 Camp Fire, offers still more evidence.) It’s also no surprise that Brühl and Sweeney, as the island’s resident salt-of-the-earth types, come off best, leaving most of the others—save Kirby, a picture of brooding restraint—to marinate in cartoon villainy. Law and de Armas, especially, tend to fall back on exaggerated, sometimes risibly semaphoric gestures, whether it’s Friedrich banging away at his typewriter in a frenzy of inspiration or the Baroness waving around a cigarette holder like Cruella de Vil of the tropics. No island would be big enough for the both of them; Howard’s movie, for no want of effort, proves scarcely more accommodating. ♦

New Yorker Favorites

In the weeks before John Wayne Gacy’s scheduled execution, he was far from reconciled to his fate.

What HBO’s “Chernobyl” got right, and what it got terribly wrong.

Why does the Bible end that way?

A new era of strength competitions is testing the limits of the human body.

How an unemployed blogger confirmed that Syria had used chemical weapons.

An essay by Toni Morrison: “The Work You Do, the Person You Are.”

Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.

Justin Chang is a film critic at The New Yorker. He won the 2024 Pulitzer Prize for criticism.
More:
Movie Reviews
Ron Howard
Read More
The Current Cinema
In Guillermo del Toro’s “Frankenstein,” a Vast Vision Gets Netflixed Down to Size
The latest reanimation of Mary Shelley’s classic tale, starring Oscar Isaac and Jacob Elordi, is a labyrinthine tour of a filmmaker’s career-long obsessions.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
“Sirāt” Is a Harrowing, Exhilarating Dance of Death
In Oliver Laxe’s desert thriller, an intensely agonizing journey reveals both the pitiless nature of fate and the stubborn persistence of compassion.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
The Joyful Mythology of “Nouvelle Vague”
Richard Linklater’s dramatization of Jean-Luc Godard’s making of “Breathless” embraces the legend of the French New Wave and its enduring influence.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Springsteen: Deliver Me from Nowhere” Tamps the Boss Down
Scott Cooper’s tightly focussed bio-pic, about the making of Bruce Springsteen’s D.I.Y. album “Nebraska,” leaves out the wide-ranging passion that went into the music.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
The Bad Show-Biz Dads of “Sentimental Value” and “Jay Kelly”
In new films from Joachim Trier and Noah Baumbach, success in filmmaking proves depressingly incompatible with success in fatherhood.
By Justin Chang
Profiles
Joachim Trier Has Put Oslo on the Cinematic Map
His new film, “Sentimental Value,” is another intimate character study set in the Norwegian capital. His approach to directing is as empathic as his films.
By Margaret Talbot
The Front Row
“Fire of Wind” Is a Bold and Inspired Début
The first feature by the Portuguese filmmaker Marta Mateus, featuring nonprofessional actors in natural settings, explores and expands modern traditions of political cinema.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Peter Hujar’s Day” Gives the Past a New Life
Ira Sachs’s film, starring Ben Whishaw as the renowned photographer and Rebecca Hall as his interviewer, is a personal memorial for the protagonist and his milieu.
By Richard Brody
Books
The Comic Genius Who Pushed Television Further Than It Could Go
In mid-century America, no one quite knew what TV would be. Sid Caesar made the medium into something new and remarkable—until the medium unmade him.
By David Denby
Onward and Upward with the Arts
Rian Johnson Is an Agatha Christie for the Netflix Age
The director revived the cozy mystery with “Knives Out.” In a new sequel, can he find his way to the end of the maze?
By Anna Russell
The Current Cinema
Emma Stone’s Apocalyptic Showdown Blooms in “Bugonia”
In Yorgos Lanthimos’s film, ripe with eco-paranoia, the actress and Jesse Plemons come to physical and psychological blows.
By Justin Chang
The Art World
Martin Puryear Changes the World Through Wood
In “Nexus,” Puryear shows that he may be America’s greatest living sculptor, a maverick who reshapes our sense of how art should look, behave, and be made.
By Susan Tallman

Sections

NewsBooks & CultureFiction & PoetryHumor & CartoonsMagazineCrosswordVideoPodcasts100th AnniversaryGoings On

More

Manage AccountShop The New YorkerBuy Covers and CartoonsCondé Nast StoreDigital AccessNewslettersJigsaw PuzzleRSSSite Map
AboutCareersContactF.A.Q.Media KitPressAccessibility HelpUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy Rights

© 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices

Your Privacy Choices