URL: https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/nov/18/harrypotter
Title: Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire review – new director Mike Newell drives the action forward | Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire | The Guardian

Skip to main content
Skip to navigation
Skip to navigation
Print subscriptions
Newsletters
Sign in
US
The Guardian - Back to home
The Guardian
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more
Film
Books
Music
Art & design
TV & radio
Stage
Classical
Games
View image in fullscreen
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. Photograph: Warner Bros/Allstar
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
 This article is more than 20 years old
Review
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire review – new director Mike Newell drives the action forward
This article is more than 20 years old

Hormones and Hermione get Harry in a tangle in the fourth episode of the series as the Hogwarts schoolkids compete for the Tri-Wizard Cup

Peter Bradshaw
Fri 18 Nov 2005 12.06 EST
Share

T
he years come and go; the seasons rise and fall; and trainee wizards Harry, Ron and Hermione have grown into loping teenagerhood, along with their actors, Daniel Radcliffe, Rupert Grint and Emma Watson. It's a weird experience for all of us getting older with them in real time. And here is their fourth adventure, The Goblet of Fire, in which, the posters promise us, dark and difficult times lie ahead. Could that subdued second adjective be hinting at metaphors for adolescent upheaval? If so, it is an adolescence so far free of acne, anti-authority attitudes and tattoos - except the one painfully imposed upon our young hero by the evil Voldemort. Harry is however feeling the painful stirrings of romance, and Hermione is increasingly exasperated that the two useless, lumbering boys she's hanging around with are failing to understand or appreciate her on any level other than chum.

Dark is what all fantasy movies aspire to be now - and director Mike Newell has certainly taken this to heart. We get an opening sequence of snakes and skulls and corridors which Newell has apparently lit with a single 30-watt bulb. Screwing up my eyes and pressing my face against the screen, I was just about able to recognise the redoubtable Eric Sykes, playing an elderly caretaker stumbling upon a hugger-mugger conspiracy of villains in which the unspeakable Dark Lord's face is still concealed. It is actually that of Ralph Fiennes, who we will get to see in scenes of Stygian gloom, his nose digitised to look like that of a malevolent tabby.

JK Rowling's whopping novel has been heavily reduced, though the resulting picture comes in at over two-and-a-half hours. There are longueurs, but Newell drives the action forward; he brings out the young actors' personalities with a subtlety and style that completely eluded Chris Columbus, who began the series. I'm not sure that Newell hasn't got a surer touch with the material than the more modish Alfonso Cuarón, the director brought in for the last screen Potter.

The plot-machinery is spurred arbitrarily into action by the formal introduction of a sporting event - the Tri-Wizard Cup - which discloses once again how weirdly old-fashioned Hogwarts is, with its Victor Ludorum ethos. That robust disciplinarian Professor Snape (Alan Rickman) incidentally dishes out some clips round the ear that would land him in court if he tried them in any modern muggle establishment. Michael Gambon's Professor Dumbledore, more or less holding to the Irish brogue his role inherited from the late Richard Harris, announces that Hogwarts is to play host to two other schools who are in competition for the three-way trophy, a terrifying game that can spell death for its combatants - and in which Harry Potter finds himself a bewildered and unwilling participant.

Some awfully fierce young warriors stride into the dining hall to introduce themselves and also a crocodile of young French ladies, parading pertly in a uniform that made me think of the misses once instructed by Miss Jean Brodie - and Dame Maggie Smith returns, of course, as Professor McGonagall, but has little to do other than maintain a look of quizzical concern under her comically battered witch's hat. Followers of the Potter franchise know that each episode brings us a scary, ambiguous new grown-up who may or may not be bad, and this time it's Alastor "Mad-Eye" Moody, played by Brendan Gleeson.

The Tri-Wizard games offer plenty of spectacle and fun, with an airborne dragon chase, underwater rescues and an adventure in a privet maze playfully recalling Kubrick's The Shining - in all of which Harry's spectacles remain magically in place. But the movie only becomes humanly interesting with the excruciating prom-style ball which the young Hogwarts scholars are forced to attend. It is here that Harry and Ron find themselves furious, confused and resentful to see that Hermione scrubs up into a premier-league babe and is being squired by the young foreign wizard superstar - but she'd accepted his invitation only because she was sick of waiting for either of these two dullards (particularly Ron) to do the decent thing and invite her. Hermione is angry and heartbroken at their churlish sneering, and Emma Watson's gutsy, confident performance nicely shows that inside and outside the world of magic there is a growing discrepancy between a teenage girl's status and her accelerating emotional and intellectual development.

This new episode should do well with the fans; for those like me who are outside but sympathetic to the faith, it looks like another handsomely made, good-natured and high-spirited family movie, which is dramatically stymied through being locked within school grounds, and by having no powerful representative of the muggle world for Harry to play against. But what confident entertainments the Harry Potter films are, speaking boldly and intelligently to their fanbase. The Star Wars prequels were ropey; the Matrices died of embarrassment; the forthcoming Narnia movies have yet to prove themselves. It may yet be that the Harry Potters will outpace even Peter Jackson's revered Tolkien epic.

Explore more on these topics
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire
Harry Potter
Daniel Radcliffe
Emma Watson
Science fiction and fantasy films
Film adaptations
JK Rowling
reviews
Share
Reuse this content
Most viewed
Film
Books
Music
Art & design
TV & radio
Stage
Classical
Games
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
Contact us
Tip us off
SecureDrop
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Tax strategy
Terms & conditions
All topics
All writers
Newsletters
Digital newspaper archive
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Threads
TikTok
YouTube
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Work for us
Accessibility settings
 
Back to top
© 2025 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)