URL: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-current-cinema/in-guillermo-del-toros-frankenstein-a-vast-vision-gets-netflixed-down-to-size
Title: In Guillermo del Toro’s “Frankenstein,” a Vast Vision Gets Netflixed Down to Size | The New Yorker

Skip to main content
Newsletter
Sign In
Search
The Latest
News
Books & Culture
Fiction & Poetry
Humor & Cartoons
Magazine
Puzzles & Games
Video
Podcasts
Goings On
Shop
100th Anniversary
The Current Cinema
In Guillermo del Toro’s “Frankenstein,” a Vast Vision Gets Netflixed Down to Size
The latest reanimation of Mary Shelley’s classic tale, starring Oscar Isaac and Jacob Elordi, is a labyrinthine tour of a filmmaker’s career-long obsessions.
By Justin Chang
October 28, 2025
Photograph by Ken Woroner / Netflix

Earlier this year, Quentin Tarantino, when asked to parse the high points of his filmography in an interview, described the two-part “Kill Bill” (2003-04) as “the movie I was born to make.” He added, “I think ‘Inglourious Basterds’ is my masterpiece, but ‘Once Upon a Time . . . in Hollywood’ is my favorite.” Might these be distinctions without a difference? I’m generally wary of artistic-birthright narratives, not least because a filmmaker of remarkable talent, consistent vision, and good fortune might well wind up with multiple candidates for the honor. Witness Ryan Coogler, who has applied the “born to make” language to both his first feature, “Fruitvale Station” (2013), and his latest, “Sinners” (2025)—his only two pictures, it’s worth noting, that aren’t installments in a studio franchise.

Still, in the case of the new “Frankenstein,” which is the thirteenth feature directed by Guillermo del Toro—and is, by almost all accounts, the movie he was born to make—the cliché warrants more consideration than hasty dismissal. This is del Toro’s personal Unholy Grail of cinema, one that he has pursued, if not from the womb, then at least from the moment he first set enraptured eyes on James Whale’s classic “Frankenstein,” from 1931. At the time, del Toro was seven years old, growing up in Guadalajara, Mexico. When he was eleven, he read Mary Shelley’s 1818 novel, “Frankenstein; or, the Modern Prometheus.” His films, which have made him Hollywood’s leading contemporary horror-fantasist, are riven with Frankensteinian impulses. No director is more fervently committed to the humanity of the monster and the monstrosity of the human. In “The Shape of Water” (2017), we root for a scaly amphibious mutant and cheer on his persecutor’s demise. In “Nightmare Alley” (2021), which sets us among the misshapen denizens of a travelling circus, a tall, handsome seducer is the only real freak in sight. The sublime “Pan’s Labyrinth” (2006)—talk about a movie that del Toro was born to make—pays homage to one of the stealthiest of all Frankenstein films, Víctor Erice’s “The Spirit of the Beehive” (1973). In that luminous classic, a six-year-old girl, after watching the 1931 film, believes the monster to be utterly, terrifyingly real. She and the young Guillermo, who turned nine the year Eríce’s film appeared, were kindred spirits.

Even so, del Toro has not merely concocted another Whale of a tale. For one thing, his “Frankenstein,” which is playing in select theatres and begins streaming November 7th, on Netflix, runs two hours and twenty-nine minutes—enough time to watch the 1931 film twice and refill a popcorn tub in between. For another, the Creature is played by Jacob Elordi, who, like most actors who have convincingly impersonated Elvis Presley, is not exactly the Boris Karloff of his day. The Creature, so often depicted as an unjolly green giant, is now a beguiling study in sentient marble—a towering, lissome, ivory-toned thing, his head bald (at first), his face and figure marked with zones of dour blue, and his loins, though presumably as reanimated as the rest of him, kept tastefully under wraps.

The first time we encounter the Creature, though, we see almost nothing of him at all: he is a faceless wraith, in a dark cloak and a vengeful mood, coldly pursuing his creator, Baron Victor Frankenstein (Oscar Isaac). It’s 1857, and we are somewhere in the Arctic. A ship, bound for the North Pole, is trapped in ice, and its stranded sailors, led by Captain Anderson (Lars Mikkelsen), extend shelter to Victor, who’s badly wounded. Much of this arises from the novel, though Shelley must have left out the part where the Creature kills several sailors with his bare hands and gets blunderbussed off the side of the ship, seemingly to his death. But then, in an exquisitely del Toro touch, the Creature’s skeletal fingers do a spidery tap dance in the snow—a sign that he is about to launch himself back into the fray. In a nice nod to Whale, someone cries out, “It’s still alive!”

Through a stroke of ingenuity, the Creature is temporarily held at bay, granting the frail Victor enough time to regale the good Captain with his life story. In a lengthy flashback, we meet the young Victor (Christian Convery), a sensitive, dark-haired child born to immense privilege but also savage paternal abuse. His father, Baron Leopold Frankenstein (Charles Dance, chillingly reptilian as ever), is a surgeon; he drills his medical expertise into his son and delivers a good thwack when drilling isn’t enough. Victor is far closer to his mother, Claire (Mia Goth), a shyly nurturing soul, though not for long. She dies giving birth to a second son, William, and for Victor, tragedy becomes destiny: he resolves to conquer death, and eclipse his father’s legacy, by learning to create new life. The gentle Convery abruptly ages into Isaac, who steps into the role with the wide-eyed fervor of a man possessed.

One of the tale’s bitterest ironies is that Victor will become a more demanding, more neglectful, and vastly more destructive father figure than Leopold ever was. Del Toro, perpetually attuned to the minutiae of process, turns the sinewy logistics of reanimation into a series of referendums on Victor’s humanity. When he calmly picks his way through freshly fallen corpses on a battlefield, Victor exhibits more than purely scientific detachment; later, you half expect him to whistle while he works, sawing through a cadaver’s limb. God is in the details, and del Toro takes a great deal of pleasure in them; no less than Victor, he is a connoisseur of carnage. Much scholarly attention is also paid to the science of electrical storage, enabling a body to function as a permanently recharged battery, and to the use of an enormous lightning-rod mechanism, which will harness lightning from atop an isolated tower, where Victor conducts his experiments. (The magnificently spiky production design, by Tamara Deverell, has a pronounced case of turrets syndrome.) When the Creature comes astonishingly to life, though not exactly as planned, Victor is entranced for all of about five minutes before seeming to lose interest. He sees only the flaws—and not the strange, unforeseeable miracles—in his design.

Should you miss the sense of family history cruelly replaying itself, here is Mia Goth again, this time playing Elizabeth, the fiancée of Victor’s younger brother, William (Felix Kammerer). When Victor falls in love with her, it’s the film’s sly way of emphasizing his mama’s-boy complex—an Oedipal touch borne out by the exquisite costumes of Kate Hawley, who outfits both Claire and Elizabeth in gowns of striking color and plumage. After Victor imprisons the Creature below stairs, it is Elizabeth who discovers and befriends him, even as she becomes proportionally more disgusted with Victor. Few filmmakers who saw Goth leering amid the carnage of “Pearl” (2022) and “Infinity Pool” (2023) would think to cast her as a woman of decency. But del Toro is playing a tricky, genre-blurring game; he uses the visual language of horror—a form that Goth emblematizes—to push us beyond horror’s expectations.

Throughout the film, del Toro flits and hovers between contradictory ideas, with the restlessness of the beautiful butterflies that Elizabeth, an amateur entomologist, likes to study. Hoping to liberate the Frankenstein myth from the deadening confines of parody and pastiche, del Toro returns to Shelley’s novel with renewed reverence, though few would mistake him for a literary purist. His inventions well up from within the material, but also from within himself; it’s as if he’s fused with the text so closely that the deeper into it he goes, the more personal his deviations and embellishments become. There’s a recurring image of an angel, resplendent in red, who haunts Victor’s childhood dreams. A Catholic tableau come to fiery life, she’s a classic del Toro image, reminiscent of the winged seraphs in “Cronos” (1992) and “Hellboy II: The Golden Army” (2008).

Later, Victor will lose one of his legs in a horrific conflagration—a flow of events so gripping that even del Toro’s most ardent loyalists might miss the visual and narrative nods to “The Devil’s Backbone,” his spectral war drama from 2001. So many movies, so many monsters: if nearly all del Toro’s work has been building up to “Frankenstein,” it only makes sense that “Frankenstein” should carry glimmers of nearly all his work.

“What makes a man a man?” a character wonders in the final scene of “Hellboy,” del Toro’s comic-book adaptation from 2004. “Is it his origins, the way he comes to life? I don’t think so. It’s the choices he makes—not how he starts things but how he decides to end them.” These words could, of course, describe Victor Frankenstein and his Creature, and the cumulative wonder of del Toro’s movie is that he makes us care, quite intently, for both. In the film’s second half, the Creature recounts his version of events, which is by turns gentle and ferocious, and finally heartbreaking. Cast adrift in a frosty wilderness—a harrowing yet welcome departure, visually, from the Gothic shadows of Victor’s lair—the Creature experiences a dollop of decency, courtesy of a blind old farmer (a wonderful David Bradley), but also a deluge of misery, courtesy of everyone else. He learns to read and speak, and, in a touch that comes straight from Shelley, immerses himself in the eschatological riddles of “Paradise Lost.” He also decides that the way of the world is violence, something that—possessing superhuman strength, self-healing powers, and unasked-for immortality—he is uniquely equipped to mete out.

Del Toro’s empathy for the Creature is total—and so, owing to the aching poignancy and underlying rage of Elordi’s performance, is ours. But the director’s identification, notably, is almost entirely with Victor, and his regard for this tortured manipulator carries with it a confessional whisper. Both men are uncompromisingly detail-oriented artists, bent on pushing extant technologies to their limits and beyond—a task that they cannot accomplish alone. One crucial character I haven’t yet mentioned is Henrich Harlander (Christoph Waltz), an arms dealer who, for dark motives of his own, insists on financing Victor’s impossible scheme, effectively coding this “Frankenstein” as an allegory of tech-bro hubris and A.I. dystopia. Reviewing the film in the Los Angeles Times, the critic Amy Nicholson impishly likened Harlander to “venture capitalists like Bryan Johnson and Peter Thiel who’ve been poking into the feasibility of pumping their veins with young blood.”

My own reading led me down a narrower and perhaps less nightmarish alley, but one with cautionary implications of its own. Harlander, a deep-pocketed benefactor with a taste for disruption, strikes me as an effective stand-in for Netflix. And, just as Victor’s Harlander-funded experiment goes logistically awry, so del Toro’s Netflix-backed dream project feels, for all its beauties and intricacies, like a technologically compromised creature. This “Frankenstein” is a visual feast, but not, as rendered here, an especially rich or sumptuous one. Seen on the big screen, it’s both a dazzler and a head-scratcher. You register the extraordinary granularity of del Toro’s visual conceptions, but the images themselves have an unenchanting, oddly digitized flatness, with little of the enveloping texture or atmosphere that the cinematographer, Dan Laustsen, achieved in “The Shape of Water” and “Nightmare Alley,” and with a surfeit of jarringly conspicuous visual effects.

“Frankenstein” is thus an enormous, fantastically elaborate canvas that feels incongruously optimized for the small screen, and, owing to its limited theatrical-distribution plans, a small-screen experience is what it will largely remain. For those of us who encountered our scariest monsters in the darkness of a movie theatre, that’s something of an injustice in itself, but an injustice that the industry has long normalized. Del Toro may well have been born to make this movie, but I’m less convinced he was born to make it for Netflix, which, for all its concerted wooing of brand-name auteurs, has yet to satisfactorily answer (or even show any interest in answering) a fundamental question: What makes a movie a movie? ♦

An earlier version of this article misspelled the name of Víctor Erice.

New Yorker Favorites

In the weeks before John Wayne Gacy’s scheduled execution, he was far from reconciled to his fate.

What HBO’s “Chernobyl” got right, and what it got terribly wrong.

Why does the Bible end that way?

A new era of strength competitions is testing the limits of the human body.

How an unemployed blogger confirmed that Syria had used chemical weapons.

An essay by Toni Morrison: “The Work You Do, the Person You Are.”

Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.

Justin Chang is a film critic at The New Yorker. He won the 2024 Pulitzer Prize for criticism.
More:
Horror Movies
Guillermo del Toro
Frankenstein
Movie Reviews
Read More
The Current Cinema
“Sirāt” Is a Harrowing, Exhilarating Dance of Death
In Oliver Laxe’s desert thriller, an intensely agonizing journey reveals both the pitiless nature of fate and the stubborn persistence of compassion.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
The Joyful Mythology of “Nouvelle Vague”
Richard Linklater’s dramatization of Jean-Luc Godard’s making of “Breathless” embraces the legend of the French New Wave and its enduring influence.
By Richard Brody
Profiles
Joachim Trier Has Put Oslo on the Cinematic Map
His new film, “Sentimental Value,” is another intimate character study set in the Norwegian capital. His approach to directing is as empathic as his films.
By Margaret Talbot
The Current Cinema
The Bad Show-Biz Dads of “Sentimental Value” and “Jay Kelly”
In new films from Joachim Trier and Noah Baumbach, success in filmmaking proves depressingly incompatible with success in fatherhood.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Fire of Wind” Is a Bold and Inspired Début
The first feature by the Portuguese filmmaker Marta Mateus, featuring nonprofessional actors in natural settings, explores and expands modern traditions of political cinema.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Peter Hujar’s Day” Gives the Past a New Life
Ira Sachs’s film, starring Ben Whishaw as the renowned photographer and Rebecca Hall as his interviewer, is a personal memorial for the protagonist and his milieu.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
Emma Stone’s Apocalyptic Showdown Blooms in “Bugonia”
In Yorgos Lanthimos’s film, ripe with eco-paranoia, the actress and Jesse Plemons come to physical and psychological blows.
By Justin Chang
Onward and Upward with the Arts
Rian Johnson Is an Agatha Christie for the Netflix Age
The director revived the cozy mystery with “Knives Out.” In a new sequel, can he find his way to the end of the maze?
By Anna Russell
The Front Row
“Springsteen: Deliver Me from Nowhere” Tamps the Boss Down
Scott Cooper’s tightly focussed bio-pic, about the making of Bruce Springsteen’s D.I.Y. album “Nebraska,” leaves out the wide-ranging passion that went into the music.
By Richard Brody
The Pictures
The Remarkable Quotidian of Peter Hujar
In 1974, the photographer described his day to a journalist: a shoot with Allen Ginsberg, a chat with Susan Sontag. The delayed result: “Peter Hujar’s Day,” a film by Ira Sachs.
By Michael Schulman
Profiles
Jennifer Lawrence Goes Dark
She has been cast in maternal roles since her teens. Now, playing a mother for the first time since becoming one, she has chosen the part of a woman pushed past the edge of sanity.
By Jia Tolentino
The Front Row
“Die My Love” Is Smaller Than Life
Jennifer Lawrence and Robert Pattinson exert themselves strenuously to give this fervent drama of marriage and motherhood a semblance of reality.
By Richard Brody

Sections

NewsBooks & CultureFiction & PoetryHumor & CartoonsMagazineCrosswordVideoPodcasts100th AnniversaryGoings On

More

Manage AccountShop The New YorkerBuy Covers and CartoonsCondé Nast StoreDigital AccessNewslettersJigsaw PuzzleRSSSite Map
AboutCareersContactF.A.Q.Media KitPressAccessibility HelpUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy Rights

© 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices

Your Privacy Choices