URL: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-front-row/kelly-reichardts-the-mastermind-reinvents-the-heist-movie
Title: Kelly Reichardt’s “The Mastermind” Reinvents the Heist Movie | The New Yorker

Skip to main content
Newsletter
Sign In
Search
The Latest
News
Books & Culture
Fiction & Poetry
Humor & Cartoons
Magazine
Puzzles & Games
Video
Podcasts
Goings On
Shop
100th Anniversary
The Front Row
Kelly Reichardt’s “The Mastermind” Reinvents the Heist Movie
This action drama, set in 1970 and starring Josh O’Connor, brings political conflict and existential comedy into the finely observed details of crime and escape.
By Richard Brody
October 15, 2025
Josh O’Connor in Kelly Reichardt’s “The Mastermind.”Photograph courtesy MUBI

One of the joys of reviewing movies is witnessing a longtime filmmaker’s artistic breakthrough, as has happened with Kelly Reichardt. A serious director with a principled world view, she formerly eschewed style and flair as if they were sins, narrowing her aesthetic to fit the points of view that she conveyed in each film. But with “Showing Up,” from 2022, she displayed, for the first time, uninhibited cinematic pleasure, an unabashed delight in inventive observation and gratuitous beauty. This may be no coincidence, given that the movie is about two artists—one working small and exquisite, the other working big and flamboyant—and it gives both their avid due. Now with a new film, “The Mastermind,” Reichardt goes drastically further in many dimensions—dramatic, aesthetic, geographical, historical, ethical. It’s one of the freest genre reimaginings and even one of the most subtly distinctive unhingings of movie narrative that I’ve seen in a while. What’s more, the gratuitous is its very subject.

“The Mastermind” is another art-world story—sort of. It’s set in 1970, mainly in Framingham, Massachusetts, where James Blaine Mooney (Josh O’Connor), called J.B., is an artisan manqué—a cabinetmaker who’s out of work and whose lofty sense of his own craft may be the reason why. He lives with his wife, Terri (Alana Haim), the family breadwinner, who works behind a typewriter in an office, and their two idiosyncratic sons, seemingly just either side of ten, Tommy (Jasper Thompson) and Carl (Sterling Thompson). One day, while the family is visiting the (fictional) Framingham Museum of Art, J.B. finds employment for his idle hands. Catching a guard asleep, he opens a display case and purloins a figurine, extracting it in an eyeglasses case that he slips into Terri’s handbag.

Then, with time to kill and energy to burn, J.B. recruits a few friends—the moppy-haired and laid-back Guy (Eli Gelb), the tense and blunt Larry (Cole Doman), and the impulsive Ronnie (Javion Allen)—to steal paintings from the museum. Even before the thieves cross the building’s threshold, “The Mastermind” emerges as an instant heist classic. Reichardt’s granular view of the plot, clearly bound for disaster, is both terribly sad and absurdly funny. Terri sews big cloth bags to fit the paintings, and J.B. flaunts his woodworking skills to craft a partitioned box in which to store the loot. Larry steals a car for the getaway; Guy parks another one to give pursuers the slip; J.B. peeks behind a painting to see how it hangs and, to instruct his crew on which paintings to snatch, makes drawings of them that betray a skill being sadly misused. Reichardt’s fanatical attention to the details of art theft conveys sincere fascination shadowed with the grim foreboding implicit in J.B.’s effort to anticipate what could go wrong.

Good luck with that. Reichardt also revels in the antics of things going awry: a locked car door can’t be opened; a schoolgirl (Margot Anderson-Song) with a beret shows up in the museum during the robbery and declaims in French from a classic play; a parking lot becomes a banal nightmare of obstacles and surveillance; eventually the thieves even encounter the menace of what might be called a rival faction. As the heist’s meticulous preparations give way to chaotic improvisation, Reichardt’s awareness of the radical contingency of concerted action—a notion that is, in its way, intrinsically political—far outstrips Paul Thomas Anderson’s attention to a revolutionary cell’s plans and risks in “One Battle After Another.”

The movie’s action scenes are built atop a peculiar and original social foundation. As the son of a notable local family, J.B. is a disappointment to his father, Bill (Bill Camp), and a bewilderment—albeit an adored one—to his mother, Sarah (Hope Davis). Their status affords him significant advantages, which play surprisingly large roles in the story. Here, too, Reichardt carefully weaves a web of connection and causality that yields a range of results—some well planned, others wickedly ironic—and which I wouldn’t dare disclose.

“The Mastermind” delivers so many narrative surprises that, in discussing it, I’m unusually wary of spoilers. It offers the pleasures of being caught off guard both by major twists and by minor details whose startling originality merits discussion but that viewers should be allowed to discover unprepared. A heist unfolds in three acts—planning, execution, and evasion—and, in “The Mastermind,” each of the three is arrestingly singular in mood and manner, with outcomes that are surprising in both practical and affective aspects. The most responsible way to communicate the delight is to share a few details but leapfrog over their place in the plot and head straight to the mighty conceit that connects them. One of Reichardt’s greatest inspirations is to create a texture of political conflict involving the Vietnam War and its manifestations in American society—news reports, marches and protests, voices of reaction, police repression—and to integrate into the story as inescapable elements of daily life.

The widely varied performances are quietly yet keenly expressive; Reichardt’s dialogue has enticingly odd spin (starting with an ingenious monologue for a precocious child) and the cast delivers it with pinpoint inflections. The period design is eyecatching and evocative: the family’s bright-green Volkswagen Beetle; J.B.’s morning getup of boxer shorts, socks, and a long-sleeved sweater; the plastic bag in which the morning paper is tossed onto the driveway. At dinner with J.B., Terri, and the boys, Davis’s Sarah steals the movie with a single gesture—taking an ear of corn, breaking it in two, and comparing the pieces’ lengths before choosing one. Yet such everyday pleasures are continually disrupted by the news: while J.B. and a son play checkers on the floor, the television blares with reports of student protests and their suppression. At one point, the anchorman Walter Cronkite appears on a neighbor’s TV, reporting on the expansion of the war to Cambodia; later, sounds of combat issue from a TV documentary that J.B. is watching. There’s a small protest in the streets of Framingham, and a larger one elsewhere. In Reichardt’s lucid approach, these wider events find their way not only into the tone of the film but even into the fabric of J.B.’s misbegotten venture.

Though the movie is infused with the central political crisis of the era, J.B. himself isn’t remotely partisan and seems to move through life benumbed to its wider conflicts. He’s probably in his early thirties, affecting longish hair and a scruffy beard without being of the young generation—likely a prewar baby coming of age in the postwar boom, his maturity falling between the Korean and Vietnam Wars. Yet, without even a hint of dissent, J.B. embodies a spirit of absolute revolt and proves his desperation through his foolhardiness. There’s a magnificent moment in “The Mastermind” that, in a glance, embodies the irreconcilable contradiction at its core. While contemplating the heist, J.B. looks out of a window and sees, across the street, a house much like his, with an ordinary-looking family outside, bustling about cheerfully. He sees everything that he lacks—starting with a place to go in the morning, something to do with his day, and the money and the sense of belonging that come with it. He also sees the way of life that, by leaping into a life of crime, he will be eternally excluded from. The wild and bitter heart of “The Mastermind” is J.B.’s self-expulsion from the daily routine of suburban life—from a normalcy that he merely mimes. In this regard, it’s a descendant of Elaine May’s “The Heartbreak Kid.”

The heist comes off as an acte gratuit—André Gide’s term for an action whose motivelessness is an assertion of freedom—and gives rise to the existential adventure of a hunted man on the run. Thus “The Mastermind” turns into a classic film noir, complete with the tawdry details of clandestinity and isolation, panic-stricken quests for hideouts, and efforts to efface identity. This, too, meshes with the politics of the time, given the lure that Canada had for those fleeing the draft, and the dangers faced by refuseniks who stayed behind. (I’d be remiss in not singling out the wise and fervent performances by Gaby Hoffmann and John Magaro, as J.B.’s longtime friends with connections to that world.) Reichardt emphasizes the extremity of the action with a strikingly novel form of cinematic narrative that, in a more ordinary drama, might feel like a facile evasion. She subtly suppresses the connective tissue of motives, acknowledgments, recognitions, and confessions. Backstory is infinitesimal, if telling. Relationships, even the most powerfully intimate ones, are treated as givens, sealed-off blanks. Events of minor import are given the same attention and emphasis as major ones, making actions—starting with the biggest action of all, the heist—come off as both arbitrary and inevitable.

In lieu of conventional character psychology, “The Mastermind” offers cinematic immersions in the moment—and Reichardt also crafts a distinctive visual style to do so. The movie is filled with long takes that owe little to theatrical continuity and instead emphasize the action’s inescapable and demanding physicality. (The gleam and thunder of Rob Mazurek’s jazz score ramps up both the twitchy energy and the subjective depth.) Stealing a car—how does it feel? Watch the thief from start to finish, popping the lock with a wire hanger, hot-wiring the ignition; then the camera stays fixed on him after the deed is done, while he’s doing nothing but driving. How to hide paintings? J.B.’s furtive nocturnal journey to stash them in a recondite but precarious site transmutes balletic calamity à la Jacques Tati into amateurish struggles that increase in absurdity as they play out in unbroken time. Reichardt’s approach to such scenes evokes not mastery or even discovery but astonishment, as if she herself were startled by the characters and the doings that she puts onscreen. She can only shake her head at J.B., but she shakes it much harder at the world. ♦

New Yorker Favorites

In the weeks before John Wayne Gacy’s scheduled execution, he was far from reconciled to his fate.

What HBO’s “Chernobyl” got right, and what it got terribly wrong.

Why does the Bible end that way?

A new era of strength competitions is testing the limits of the human body.

How an unemployed blogger confirmed that Syria had used chemical weapons.

An essay by Toni Morrison: “The Work You Do, the Person You Are.”

Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.

Richard Brody, a film critic, began writing for The New Yorker in 1999. He is the author of “Everything Is Cinema: The Working Life of Jean-Luc Godard.”
More:
Movie Reviews
Heists
Film Noir
Kelly Reichardt
Read More
The Front Row
“Springsteen: Deliver Me from Nowhere” Tamps the Boss Down
Scott Cooper’s tightly focussed bio-pic, about the making of Bruce Springsteen’s D.I.Y. album “Nebraska,” leaves out the wide-ranging passion that went into the music.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Fire of Wind” Is a Bold and Inspired Début
The first feature by the Portuguese filmmaker Marta Mateus, featuring nonprofessional actors in natural settings, explores and expands modern traditions of political cinema.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
“Sirāt” Is a Harrowing, Exhilarating Dance of Death
In Oliver Laxe’s desert thriller, an intensely agonizing journey reveals both the pitiless nature of fate and the stubborn persistence of compassion.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Peter Hujar’s Day” Gives the Past a New Life
Ira Sachs’s film, starring Ben Whishaw as the renowned photographer and Rebecca Hall as his interviewer, is a personal memorial for the protagonist and his milieu.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
The Joyful Mythology of “Nouvelle Vague”
Richard Linklater’s dramatization of Jean-Luc Godard’s making of “Breathless” embraces the legend of the French New Wave and its enduring influence.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
Emma Stone’s Apocalyptic Showdown Blooms in “Bugonia”
In Yorgos Lanthimos’s film, ripe with eco-paranoia, the actress and Jesse Plemons come to physical and psychological blows.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
In Guillermo del Toro’s “Frankenstein,” a Vast Vision Gets Netflixed Down to Size
The latest reanimation of Mary Shelley’s classic tale, starring Oscar Isaac and Jacob Elordi, is a labyrinthine tour of a filmmaker’s career-long obsessions.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
The Bad Show-Biz Dads of “Sentimental Value” and “Jay Kelly”
In new films from Joachim Trier and Noah Baumbach, success in filmmaking proves depressingly incompatible with success in fatherhood.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Die My Love” Is Smaller Than Life
Jennifer Lawrence and Robert Pattinson exert themselves strenuously to give this fervent drama of marriage and motherhood a semblance of reality.
By Richard Brody
Profiles
Joachim Trier Has Put Oslo on the Cinematic Map
His new film, “Sentimental Value,” is another intimate character study set in the Norwegian capital. His approach to directing is as empathic as his films.
By Margaret Talbot
Books
Anthony Hopkins’s Beckettian Memoir
The actor recalls his life, from provincial Wales to Hollywood, in stop-start rhythms with curt, unflinching reckonings.
By Anthony Lane
A Critic at Large
What Do We Want from Our Child Stars?
Adoration, exploitation, and the strange afterlife of being celebrated too soon.
By Adam Gopnik

Sections

NewsBooks & CultureFiction & PoetryHumor & CartoonsMagazineCrosswordVideoPodcasts100th AnniversaryGoings On

More

Manage AccountShop The New YorkerBuy Covers and CartoonsCondé Nast StoreDigital AccessNewslettersJigsaw PuzzleRSSSite Map
AboutCareersContactF.A.Q.Media KitPressAccessibility HelpUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy Rights

© 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices

Your Privacy Choices