URL: https://reviewsbyrhiannon.wordpress.com/2017/11/03/legally-blonde-2001-review/
Title: Legally Blonde (2001) Review – Reviews by Rhiannon

Skip to content
REVIEWS BY RHIANNON
Reviews of films and television programmes *contains spoilers*
HOME
ABOUT
FILM
BLOGMAS
CLASSIC
TELEVISION
DETECTIVES
DRAMAS
POLDARK
STRICTLY COME DANCING
CONTACT

FILM

Legally Blonde (2001) Review
Date: November 3, 2017
Author: reviewsbyrhiannon
1 Comment

Elle: I just don’t think that Brooke could’ve done this. Exercise gives you endorphins. Endorphins make you happy. Happy people just don’t shoot their husbands. They just don’t.

(Flawless logic there…)

I first saw this film when I was flicking through the TV on a Sunday afternoon, and never did I think it would become a firm favourite of mine! I’ve watched it on DVD countless times and still it makes me laugh and feel good. I love that it shows you shouldn’t put barriers on what you can achieve (although the film may be a little unbelievable…) and that you shouldn’t judge a book by its cover. More than that however, I just love the story and the comedy in it!

The story begins similar to your standard rom-com, with Elle Woods (Reese Witherspoon) getting ready with her friends to meet her boyfriend Warner (Matthew Davis), who she thinks will propose to her. It turns out he was actually taking her out to dump her because he needs someone “serious” to pursue his law/political career. Elle does not take this well and rather than moping around (although she does do this a little) or finding a new boyfriend, she decides to win Warner back by getting into Harvard Law School, which she manages through passing the admissions test and with a not so conventional video…Once there however she discovers Warner has got engaged to a someone “serious”: Vivian Kensington (Selma Blair) and for me this is where the film comes into its own. Elle overcomes prejudices of the other students and, after meeting Emmett (Luke Wilson) who gives her advice, flourishes and manages to gain an internship at Professor Callahan’s (Victor Garber) law firm. They have a case to defend famous fitness instructor Brooke Windham (Ali Larter) who is charged with murdering her husband, and Elle is the only one who believes her innocence. The court scenes were brilliant, and (predictably) Elle saves the day and finishes the film with a top law degree, job offers, and a husband to be.

Although the film has several unbelievable moments, for me this doesn’t spoil it in the slightest. It only adds to the comedy and also to the overriding message of not limiting people by appearance etc. It is undoubtedly a comedy with brilliant moments, but does also have some more serious moments as Elle is rejected by the other students and also when Callahan tried to make a move on her. This was not just a standard, run of the mill, light hearted rom-com, but rather a comedy with a good story, interesting characters, hilarious moments, and dare I say it, an inspiring message!

Elle is such a likeable character, played so well by Witherspoon, that it’s impossible not to be drawn into her story. I was willing her to be successful for herself and not just to win back Warner (thankfully she does ditch him!) and as well as her developing and learning about herself, she selflessly helped others. Her friendship with Paulette (Jennifer Coolidge), a salon worker was lovely to watch and, although in my opinion the salon scenes were some of the weaker ones compared to the rest of the film, it was still nice to see Elle hadn’t completely lost her identity in becoming a law student. Her developing friendship with Vivian was one of my favourite parts of the film, and made Vivian a more multi-dimensional character. The resulting romance with Emmett was predictable but nonetheless still a satisfying end to the story.

Despite me talking about inspiring messages etc etc, for me this film is simply a feel good, uplifting film that is guaranteed to make me laugh and cheer me up no matter what’s been happening that day. Seeing Elle develop as a law student and starting to do well in classes (e.g. in one about paternal rights) was great to watch, and also made me want to make a CV that was also pink and scented… There are so many classic lines and scenes including: Warner breaking up with Elle, Elle visiting Brooke in prison to get her alibi, and the whole performance in the court room (special shout out to Elle’s friends from home who made this even funnier!) Seeing her flounder and then suddenly hit on the right result was a little unbelievable but nonetheless hilarious and great to see.

Overall, this film should not be dismissed as a standard light rom-com. It is a clever comedy with some thought provoking moments too. It is thoroughly enjoyable on so many levels, and will leave you wanting to be Elle Woods! If nothing else it will show the importance of knowing abou haircare and perms…

Share this:
 X Facebook
Loading...
CINEMACOMEDYELLE WOODSFILMLEGALLY BLONDELUKE WILSONMATTHEW DAVISMOVIEREESE WITHERSPOONREVIEWROM-COMSELMA BLAIR
Published by reviewsbyrhiannon

Reviews on classic films, the occasional new film, and TV dramas View all posts by reviewsbyrhiannon

Post navigation
PREVIOUS
Previous post:
Vertigo (1958) Review
NEXT
Next post:
Charade (1963) Review
ONE THOUGHT ON “LEGALLY BLONDE (2001) REVIEW”

Add Comment

mastermixmovies
July 24, 2018 at 5:41 pm

Love the review! I just reviewed Legally Blonde if you want to check it out: https://mastermixmovies.wordpress.com/2018/07/24/bend-and-snap/

Like

Reply
LEAVE A COMMENT
Search for:
Search
RECENT POSTS
The Best Songs from The Sound of Music
Around the World in 80 Days TV series (2021) review
West Side Story (2021) Review
McDonald & Dodds Review
Top Hat (1935) Review
The Nun’s Story (1959) Review
Knives Out (2019) Review
25 Best ever dances on Strictly Come Dancing
ARCHIVES
March 2022 (1)
January 2022 (2)
March 2021 (1)
February 2021 (2)
January 2021 (1)
December 2020 (3)
November 2020 (2)
October 2020 (2)
August 2020 (1)
April 2020 (3)
December 2018 (24)
November 2018 (1)
April 2018 (3)
February 2018 (1)
November 2017 (2)
March 2017 (2)
January 2017 (2)
December 2016 (8)
November 2016 (2)
October 2016 (7)
September 2016 (11)
FOLLOW ME
X
 
Instagram

© 2025 REVIEWS BY RHIANNON

BLOG AT WORDPRESS.COM.

Comment
 
Reblog
 
Subscribe
 
Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use.
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here: Cookie Policy
Design a site like this with WordPress.com
Get started