URL: https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/jun/18/3
Title: Mean Girls - review | Movies | The Guardian

Skip to main content
Skip to navigation
Skip to navigation
Print subscriptions
Newsletters
Sign in
US
The Guardian - Back to home
The Guardian
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more
Film
Books
Music
Art & design
TV & radio
Stage
Classical
Games
View image in fullscreen
 Photograph: Allstar/Paramount/Sportsphoto Ltd
Movies
 This article is more than 21 years old
Review
Mean Girls - review
This article is more than 21 years old

Cert 12A

Peter Bradshaw
Thu 17 Jun 2004 21.50 EDT
Share

T
he tagline for this movie - Watch Your Back - reminded me of Edie Falco's cry from the heart when she had appeared at the Emmys to collect an award for her performance in The Sopranos. Horrible Joan Rivers had been nasty about her frock. Edie was crushed. She said it felt like "being at the prom and discovering the most popular girl in school had stuck a wad of gum on your back". It's the kind of mortification that can only happen in school, and the pain lingers, which perhaps explains why high school movies thrive.

And in this genre, just at the moment, it is 17-year-old Lindsay Lohan who just so totally rules. Without being particularly sexy or smart or funny, she has a box-office profile that is mysteriously hot enough to fry an egg on. From almost nowhere, she has become the pert princess of films like Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen. This is despite the fact that she looks and acts much older than her years - and not in a precocious, sexily hard-nosed 13-going-on-30 sort of a way, but an SUV-driving soccer mom sort of way. Her best role by a mile has been in the body-swap comedy Freaky Friday, where she got to inhabit the form of Jamie Lee Curtis and looked scarily plausible as the bürgerliche American working mother.

Now Lohan is back in a standard-issue high-school comedy, all set to dominate the multiplexes this summer, focused on the perennially fascinating subject of cruelty and bullying and generally being a bitch - or, as this film coyly rephrases it, a "by-otch". The comedy is, however, pusillanimously counterweighted with a solemn and Oprah-ish subtext that these are, like, way important issues, of the sort aired by the serious drama Thirteen, with Evan Rachel Wood. Movies ranging from comedies such as Heathers, Clueless and 10 Things I Hate About You to Alexander Schmidt's incomparable satire Election and Gus Van Sant's Columbine nightmare, Elephant, have shown how you can get far superior high school films in a range of flavours. This one tastes like decaffeinated Diet Pepsi.

Lohan plays Cady, a new girl at high school who, like the teen-queen daughter in The Wild Thornberries, has been "home-schooled" by her explorer parents in a country the script vaguely refers to as "Africa". As ever in the HS genre, we get her first-day point-of-view shot, as she threads her wary way through the melee outside class, with jocks and nerds and cool kids catching her eye briefly and contemptuously. Then, of course, she has to hook up with nerdy-but-smart outsiders who introduce us chorically to the school's power structure and pecking order. These include a grungey, dykey girl called Janis Ian (Lizzy Caplan) whose indie-songstress name is presumably a deliberate joke. Then Cady has to make intimate friends - leapfrogging rank and precedence with miraculous speed - with the villainesses of the piece.

This is the trio of spoilt princesses with complete social-scene suzerainty. Flawless blonde Regina (Rachel McAdams) is a 21st-century Barbie Borgia with two sycophants in tow: the neurotically self-loathing second-in-command Gretchen (Lacey Chabert) and the IQ-challenged Karen (Amanda Seyfried) who says her breasts can tell her when it's going to rain, a claim she modifies to saying that her breasts can tell her when it is actually raining. Cady has a plan to infiltrate their clique as a new member to destroy them from the inside. But of course having been accepted by them, she experiences the classic double-agent dilemma. Cady begins to be chuffed by her new status; she grows to like obsessing about food, looks and weight and is secretly thrilled by her licence to be bitchy and cruel.

There are a few laughs, particularly with Gretchen's resentment of Regina's power, which spills out in an essay on Julius Caesar she reads out in English class: "Listen, why should Brutus always be, like, second-best to Caesar? That's totally not what Rome should be about!" But Lohan herself, while supposedly the nice-yet-pretty straight-A student that we're all supposed to support, always manages to convey an unintentionally sinister image. For example: she is the only young woman in the school who keeps managing to show off her cleavage. In every shot, every scene, wholesome Lindsay somehow contrives to have low-cut tops. None of the other tramps and sluts get to display their embonpoints quite as flagrantly.

The queasiest moment comes when Cady is persuaded to compete in a "mathlete" team against a rival school, humbly abasing herself to hang with the losers, and finds herself in a head-to-head with an absurdly ugly girl with a joined-up mono-eyebrow and bushy moustache. Lindsay earnestly tells herself and us in an internal monologue that we mustn't make fun of her. Then beats the hell out of her in mental arithmetic. So the cute, smart girl gets to beat the hilariously ugly one! And this movie gets to have its great big pink, sparkly, girly cake and eat it too, without gaining a single pound. You might find it indigestible.

Explore more on these topics
Film
Mean Girls
reviews
Share
Reuse this content
Most viewed
Film
Books
Music
Art & design
TV & radio
Stage
Classical
Games
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
Contact us
Tip us off
SecureDrop
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Tax strategy
Terms & conditions
All topics
All writers
Newsletters
Digital newspaper archive
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Threads
TikTok
YouTube
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Work for us
Accessibility settings
 
Back to top
© 2025 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)