URL: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-front-row/megadoc-shows-francis-ford-coppola-going-for-broke-on-megalopolis
Title: “Megadoc” Shows Francis Ford Coppola Going for Broke on “Megalopolis” | The New Yorker

Skip to main content
Newsletter
Sign In
Search
The Latest
News
Books & Culture
Fiction & Poetry
Humor & Cartoons
Magazine
Puzzles & Games
Video
Podcasts
Goings On
Shop
100th Anniversary
The Front Row
“Megadoc” Shows Francis Ford Coppola Going for Broke on “Megalopolis”
Mike Figgis’s documentary reveals the risky freedom of Coppola’s approach to his self-financed political fantasy.
By Richard Brody
September 12, 2025
Francis Ford Coppola sits with Mike Figgis.Photograph courtesy Utopia

Even benevolent producers who give directors total freedom to make films can’t quite do so, by dint of the fact that they’re giving it; the imbalance of power is built into their generosity. Freedom can only be taken, at a price, and, for Francis Ford Coppola, the price of freedom to make the grand-scale political fantasy “Megalopolis” was a hundred and twenty million dollars, which he raised by selling off part of his winery. He’d been trying to make the movie for about thirty years. He finally got to shoot it in 2022 and 2023, when he was eighty-three. As if its production were a solution to a long-puzzling problem, he made sure to show his work: he invited the director Mike Figgis to the set, near Atlanta, to shoot a documentary about the film. The result, “Megadoc,” which opens September 19th, is a fascinating, inspiring view of a filmmaker whose methods are as boldly original as his movie.

With “Megalopolis,” the first freedom that Coppola seized was the freedom to fail. “Megadoc” opens with Coppola admitting that he’s scared, which he calls “a really good thing”: “I’m doing something I don’t know how to do.” He’s investing his own money—but he’s not scared of losing it; if commercial failure is what it takes for him to succeed, by his own lights, artistically, so be it. The example he cites is Jacques Tati, whose personal investment in his late-career masterwork, “Playtime,” forced him into bankruptcy. “But who cares if you die broke if you made something that you think is beautiful?” Coppola says. In order for Coppola to feel that he’s making something beautiful, the documentary shows, he needs to work in a way that delights him, too: “I want to have fun.”

Before going on set, Coppola shows how he has fun with actors. He gathers members of his cast, including Aubrey Plaza, Shia LaBeouf, and Jon Voight, for so-called rehearsals that are more like loose acting classes. Coppola supervises them in improvisations and exercises (such as “sound ball”), and he sometimes joins in. He tries to relax the performers with a speech in which he turns Dante’s motto for Hell into a slogan for theatrical paradise: “Abandon worry, all ye who enter here.” Coppola tells the actors, “When you’re in this space, you’re not you, you are the character you’re playing.” It’s an instruction that preserves Method acting’s element of play but dispenses with its agonized self-scrutiny.

In “Megadoc,” Figgis talks with Coppola and keeps a close watch on him at work. Unobtrusively conventional in form, the documentary is discerningly observant about Coppola’s interactions with the movie’s big personalities—including Dustin Hoffman, Giancarlo Esposito, and Nathalie Emmanuel. The actors also get time alone, in one-on-one interviews, to talk about the project. (The film’s star, Adam Driver, preferred to appear less often while shooting, but he, too, is interviewed.) Figgis also speaks with crew members and, in lieu of a voice-over narration, he puts himself on camera to reflect on what he’s seeing. Above all, what “Megadoc” reveals is that Coppola filmed the wildly unconventional story of “Megalopolis” in wildly unconventional ways, and that these methods are fully visible in the finished film.

“Megadoc” is, at heart, a story of liberation. “Megalopolis” is Coppola’s pet project, which he conceived around forty years before shooting it. (Coppola’s biographer Sam Wasson, interviewed by Figgis, says that the project was born soon after the filmmaker lost control of his studio, American Zoetrope, following the catastrophic release of his 1981 musical, “One from the Heart.”) He had tried and failed to get “Megalopolis” made before; Figgis includes clips from the early two-thousands showing a table read with Robert De Niro, Uma Thurman, and Billy Crudup, plus rehearsals of it with Anton Yelchin and Ryan Gosling. But what is liberated in the eventual production is an adventuresome process in keeping with the grand scale of the story that the film tells. “Megalopolis” is a futuristic fantasy of ancient Roman inspiration, in which a visionary artist-cum-scientist-cum-urbanist (Driver) faces political opposition for his utopian scheme of urban innovation from a plutocrat (Voight), a demagogue (LaBeouf), an ex (Plaza), and the mayor (Esposito), whose daughter (Emmanuel) he falls in love with. To realize his epic, Coppola launched a production of colossal dimensions. “Megadoc” shows that what’s truly utopian about “Megalopolis” is its mode of production; Figgis’s perceptive view of the shoot brings to the fore the artistic ideas that Coppola’s way of working embodies.

One of the constants of Coppola’s career is the intensity of the performances that he elicits. He has a background in theatre, and the expressivity that he summons in his movies often seems harnessed to the text, as if the screenplay were the thing and the movie merely its elucidation. One of the few and surprising benefits of an awful situation—Coppola’s difficulties getting movie projects financed in recent decades—is that he has had the time and the inclination to contemplate the essence of cinema, or, at least, of his cinema, which he sees as inextricably connected to theatre. (In 2017, he even published a book on the subject: “Live Cinema and Its Techniques.”) A crucial difference between “Megalopolis” and the films from Coppola’s illustrious Hollywood career is that, in the new movie, this connection is reimagined and radicalized. Far from filming the script of “Megalopolis” with precise dramatic economy, Coppola relies on his screenplay to trigger events—to spark real-time behavioral surprises.

Figgis comments that Coppola uses the script as a mere premise, and he likens Coppola’s approach to it as “instinctive,” calling the director “kind of like a jazz musician.” Voight, who says, “I’ve never worked with a more open process,” repeats a remark of Coppola’s, saying, “The script is just the bones and we’re going to have to find out what it is.” Hoffman (who plays the mayor’s fixer) describes Coppola’s way of working with actors: “In a sense, he’s rehearsing at the same time that he’s shooting.” Driver offers a trenchantly dialectical account of Coppola’s artistic and practical method: “He’s structured his day—and that’s why he’s paying for it—to make sure that he can control how to . . . trust his cast and give them total control to come up with something that he hasn’t thought of.” Daniel Ezralow, the choreographer of “Megalopolis,” discusses advanced techniques that he taught cast members (including “alternate movement” and “body therapy”) and that Coppola integrated into the performances, saying that Coppola’s work has “one foot in theatrical, one foot in cinema.” Talking with Plaza, Figgis likens the shoot to a “weird experimental theatre company.” He also puts on view the most daringly experimental aspect of the production of “Megalopolis”—and it’s not the direction of actors.

The scale of “Megalopolis” is enormous—the size of its sets, the number of its extras, the set design and costumes that it requires, the complexity of its staging. Coppola says that even “Apocalypse Now”—which, he emphasizes, used helicopters—“wasn’t on this scale.” “Megalopolis” is filled with grand crowd scenes, fight scenes, chase scenes, dance scenes, harrowing violence, public celebrations, mighty spectacles of political conflict. But, for Coppola, the massive sets and elaborate dramaturgy didn’t impose rigorous order on the shoot or dictate meticulous forethought regarding its use; on the contrary, they served as his own gigantic playground. The filming emerges as less a matter of Coppola fulfilling intricately preconceived stagings than of his setting the tumult in motion and discovering its possibilities as it’s unleashed.

When Coppola refers to fun, he means it literally. “Moviemaking is not work, it’s play,” he tells Figgis. “Toil gives you nothing, play gives you everything.” He provided himself with the resources for a great deal of play, and the freedom to engage in it. The visual extravagances of “Megalopolis” require complicated visual effects, and Coppola intended to realize them not with C.G.I. but with practical, physical devices—knowing that he’d only find out whether they work by actually filming them. The producer Michael Bederman says that Coppola “really needs to feel physical space,” and that space, shown in “Megadoc,” is, above all, felt in “Megalopolis.” When Driver and Emmanuel are seen walking on construction beams suspended from cables, they are—as Figgis shows—actually walking on dangling beams. (A 2024 report explains that the actors had no harnesses, and their safety net was trapeze netting, which they had to be taught to fall safely into.) Coppola’s audaciously improvisational approach to his sets is inseparable from the acting that takes place on them. For all the image-mad artifice of “Megalopolis,” the movie is driven by its exuberant performances. The actors’ wild, eccentric, impulsive immediacy—which Coppola’s direction not only favors but provokes, even demands—turns “Megalopolis” into another mega-documentary, an accurate record of the excitement.

A revelatory sequence in “Megadoc” shows Coppola arguing with the cinematographer, Mihai Mălaimare, Jr., about the lighting of a shot, which Mălaimare wants to keep consistent with other shots in the scene, for the sake of a conventionally smooth edit. Coppola says that Mălaimare has no business anticipating how the film will be edited, and the director lays down the law: “To me, your job is not to match all the light. Your job is to get beautiful images of the scenes that we have.” Figgis teases out of Coppola the underlying philosophy behind these free-spirited methods. Coppola, who has been directing movies since 1963, voices his frustrations with the technical and material encumbrances that inhere in the conventional, professional way of working. The emphasis on keeping things “controllable,” he says, means that “cinema is the only art that kills what it’s trying to preserve.” In “Megalopolis,” he tries to keep the live part of cinema, the theatre-like aspect, alive.

My one-word definition of theatre is fear—the awareness that there’s nothing separating performers from spectators, that what’s occurring onstage could easily carry over into the audience. Coppola famously built exactly such a disturbing thrill into “Megalopolis,” with a scene designed so that an actor comes out from the wings of the theatre, stands in front of the screen, and interviews the movie’s protagonist, played by Driver. (At a screening I attended, a publicist working for the distributor did the honors.) But even before that literally frame-breaking moment, the events onscreen in “Megalopolis” seem to escape the frame metaphorically: the hectic performances leap through it, the camera moves defy it, the sets overflow its borders, and near-cosmic visions of supernaturally biomorphic magnificence unsynch the frame from the normal flow of time.

Figgis shows a clip of Coppola planning “One from the Heart”—the project that left the ruins from which “Megalopolis” arose—and discussing the intricate electronic-cinema system, housed in a trailer called the Silverfish (which still exists and which Coppola uses on “Megalopolis”), as a way not merely to tell a story but to explore “what the nature of existence is, what the nature of being a human being is.” That’s what it feels like to watch “Megalopolis”; Coppola didn’t have the practical freedom to pursue this philosophical dream until providing it for himself.

Coppola describes his own methods and their relationship to the realities that they provoke. He may look as if he’s “thriving on chaos,” he says, but actually he is “confronting chaos.” The chaos, however, is of his own making, and, though the onscreen results are thrilling, the real-life chaos during the shoot was sometimes troubling. In “Megadoc,” Figgis asks Bederman about “the kind of safety nets that would normally be there that are missing” from the shoot of “Megalopolis.” “Well, anybody who can say no,” Bederman responds. That may have worked well aesthetically, but not necessarily in other ways.

Figgis notes that there was discord on the set, which led to the departure, mid-shoot, of key personnel in the art and design departments. “Megadoc” features interviews with the production designer Beth Mickle, who was among those who left, and who cites communication failures leaving her feeling “put in a position where there was no way forward.” After the film was done, there were allegations that Coppola, while filming a scene set in a night club, tried to kiss several female extras, and Variety published videos of such incidents; Coppola has denied the allegations and sued the publication for libel. “Megadoc” doesn’t address the matter. What it does make clear, nonetheless, is that a movie set isn’t a blank canvas but a workplace; the first human beings whose nature is implicated in a film are the ones who are working on it. Just as with freedom, chaos taken for oneself isn’t the same as chaos given to others, and the difference again involves a power relationship. What one person intends as play, another may find painfully serious. Personal freedom, on a movie set as in civil society at large, risks impinging on that of others, and the balance remains as crucial in law as it does on a movie set. The making of “Megalopolis” may not be just an experiment in the art of cinema—it may also serve as an unintended experiment in the social psychology and the managerial ethics of filmmaking, with findings of similarly great importance. ♦

New Yorker Favorites

In the weeks before John Wayne Gacy’s scheduled execution, he was far from reconciled to his fate.

What HBO’s “Chernobyl” got right, and what it got terribly wrong.

Why does the Bible end that way?

A new era of strength competitions is testing the limits of the human body.

How an unemployed blogger confirmed that Syria had used chemical weapons.

An essay by Toni Morrison: “The Work You Do, the Person You Are.”

Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.

Richard Brody, a film critic, began writing for The New Yorker in 1999. He is the author of “Everything Is Cinema: The Working Life of Jean-Luc Godard.”
More:
Movie Reviews
Francis Ford Coppola
Adam Driver
Dustin Hoffman
Documentary Films
Filmmaking
Read More
The Front Row
“Peter Hujar’s Day” Gives the Past a New Life
Ira Sachs’s film, starring Ben Whishaw as the renowned photographer and Rebecca Hall as his interviewer, is a personal memorial for the protagonist and his milieu.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
The Joyful Mythology of “Nouvelle Vague”
Richard Linklater’s dramatization of Jean-Luc Godard’s making of “Breathless” embraces the legend of the French New Wave and its enduring influence.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
Emma Stone’s Apocalyptic Showdown Blooms in “Bugonia”
In Yorgos Lanthimos’s film, ripe with eco-paranoia, the actress and Jesse Plemons come to physical and psychological blows.
By Justin Chang
Profiles
Joachim Trier Has Put Oslo on the Cinematic Map
His new film, “Sentimental Value,” is another intimate character study set in the Norwegian capital. His approach to directing is as empathic as his films.
By Margaret Talbot
The Current Cinema
In Guillermo del Toro’s “Frankenstein,” a Vast Vision Gets Netflixed Down to Size
The latest reanimation of Mary Shelley’s classic tale, starring Oscar Isaac and Jacob Elordi, is a labyrinthine tour of a filmmaker’s career-long obsessions.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
“Sirāt” Is a Harrowing, Exhilarating Dance of Death
In Oliver Laxe’s desert thriller, an intensely agonizing journey reveals both the pitiless nature of fate and the stubborn persistence of compassion.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Fire of Wind” Is a Bold and Inspired Début
The first feature by the Portuguese filmmaker Marta Mateus, featuring nonprofessional actors in natural settings, explores and expands modern traditions of political cinema.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
The Bad Show-Biz Dads of “Sentimental Value” and “Jay Kelly”
In new films from Joachim Trier and Noah Baumbach, success in filmmaking proves depressingly incompatible with success in fatherhood.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Springsteen: Deliver Me from Nowhere” Tamps the Boss Down
Scott Cooper’s tightly focussed bio-pic, about the making of Bruce Springsteen’s D.I.Y. album “Nebraska,” leaves out the wide-ranging passion that went into the music.
By Richard Brody
Onward and Upward with the Arts
Rian Johnson Is an Agatha Christie for the Netflix Age
The director revived the cozy mystery with “Knives Out.” In a new sequel, can he find his way to the end of the maze?
By Anna Russell
American Chronicles
What Was the American Revolution For?
Amid plans to mark the nation’s semiquincentennial, many are asking whether or not the people really do rule, and whether the law is still king.
By Jill Lepore
The Art World
A Daring Show Remixes the Monuments of the Confederacy
As the Trump Administration tries to rescue symbols of the Lost Cause, an exhibition in Los Angeles, led by Kara Walker, finds meaning in their desecration.
By Julian Lucas

Sections

NewsBooks & CultureFiction & PoetryHumor & CartoonsMagazineCrosswordVideoPodcasts100th AnniversaryGoings On

More

Manage AccountShop The New YorkerBuy Covers and CartoonsCondé Nast StoreDigital AccessNewslettersJigsaw PuzzleRSSSite Map
AboutCareersContactF.A.Q.Media KitPressAccessibility HelpUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy Rights

© 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices

Your Privacy Choices