URL: https://variety.com/2023/film/reviews/prom-pact-review-peyton-elizabeth-lee-1235567881/
Title: 'Prom Pact' Review: Disney's Teen Movie Is at the Top of Its Class

Plus Icon
Film
Plus Icon
TV
Plus Icon
What To Watch
Plus Icon
Music
Plus Icon
Docs
Plus Icon
Digital & Gaming
Plus Icon
Global
Plus Icon
Awards Circuit
Plus Icon
Video
Plus Icon
What To Hear
Plus Icon
Click to expand the Mega Menu
Plus Icon
Click to Expand Search Input
Got a Tip?
Newsletters
Switch edition between
U.S. Edition 
Variety
Home
Film
Reviews
Mar 29, 2023 11:25am PT
‘Prom Pact’ Review: Disney’s Sweet, Sincere Teen Movie Is at the Top of Its Class

Peyton Elizabeth Lee excels in the lead role with a performance that would make Molly Ringwald proud.

By Michael Nordine

Plus Icon
Courtesy of Disney/Eric Milner

Few events loom larger in the minds of movie teenagers than prom. Dreams are realized, bullies are put in their place, girls are declared “all that.” Real life is rarely as dramatic, thankfully, but that doesn’t mean we should expect studios (and streamers) to stop trying to make the next “Pretty in Pink” or “10 Things I Hate About You” anytime soon. Disney offer a fresh take on teendom’s big night with “Prom Pact,” in which two platonic best friends who are more comfortable on the outside looking in decide to finally step into the fray of high school life.

Related Stories
Priyanka Chopra Jonas' First Look in 'RRR' Director S.S. Rajamouli's Globe-Trotting Action Film Unveiled Ahead of Title Reveal
Mahesh Babu, S.S. Rajamouli and Priyanka Chopra Jonas Epic Adventure Titled 'Varanasi,' First Footage Unveiled

Mandy Yang (Peyton Elizabeth Lee) first appears in a Ruth Bader Ginsburg T-shirt, obsessively refreshing her Harvard application in the hopes that it’s gone from “pending” to “accepted” while trying to avoid the pep rally where North Seattle High will officially announce its prom theme: the ‘80s. “Real life starts once we get out of here and go to college,” she says to bestie Ben Plunkett (Milo Manheim), who’s slightly more enthused about the prospect of having a traditional high-school experience than she is. She asks him to prom as a gesture of goodwill despite the fact that “the only thing I hate more than slow dancing is the gender wage gap,” setting the stage for what so far feels like yet another familiar teen movie.

Popular on Variety

Not that that’s necessarily a bad thing; this formula is tried and true for a reason. Among the predictable bits here, a deception comes back to haunt the protagonist in the third act, which in this case entails Mandy trying to become friends with the most popular kid in school (Blake Draper) because his dad is a Harvard alum and her entire life trajectory is predicated upon being accepted. Directed by Anya Adams (a veteran of such TV series as “Black-ish,” “Glow” and “Yellowjackets”) and written by Anthony Lombardo (“Modern Family”), what follows is sweeter and more clever than the majority of its peers.

It has its own lingo, as so many of its predecessors do — “Everests” are the fellow students Mandy and Ben look down on because they’re peaking in high school — as well as familiar adult faces in snarky supporting roles. Here it’s Margaret Cho as Mandy’s guidance counselor and Wendi McLendon-Covey as her mother, with Cho in particular acquitting herself well as a reliable confidante. More than anything else, though, the film owes its success to Lee.

The star makes Mandy more than just the slogans on her T-shirts (“less plastic, more ocean”) and turns her into a three-dimensional being with far more depth than we’ve come to expect from such characters. She rolls her eyes at the increasingly elaborate “promposals” her classmates contrive and values her friendship with Ben more than whatever joys prom could offer, but the softer side that inevitably emerges feels as bighearted and authentic as they come.

That “Prom Pact” is bypassing theaters for a March 30 premiere on the Disney Channel before arriving on Disney+ the following day makes it unlikely to receive a wide audience, which is a shame. The film is an exemplar of its genre, one that honors its forebears while also acknowledging and attempting to correct their more glaring faults. (An early scene in which the problematic aspects of “The Breakfast Club” and “Weird Science” are pointed out reads as affectionate rather than scolding.) “Prom Pact” may not be the valedictorian of teen movies, but it’s certainly in the top 10% of its graduating class.

Read More About:
Peyton Elizabeth Lee
‘Prom Pact’ Review: Disney’s Sweet, Sincere Teen Movie Is at the Top of Its Class
Reviewed online, March 29, 2023. Running time: 99 MIN.
Production: A Disney+ release of a Disney production. Producer: Warren Carr. Executive producers: Anya Adams, Julie Bowen, Rachael Field, Jake Kasdan, Melvin Mar. Co-producer: Peyton Elizabeth Lee.
Crew: Director: Anya Adams. Writer: Anthony Lombardo. Cinematographer: Clark Mathis. Editor: Shannon Baker Davis.
With: Peyton Elizabeth Lee, Milo Manheim, Blake Draper, Monique Green, Arica Himmel, Jason Sakaki, Chelah Horsdal, David S. Jung, Wendi McLendon-Covey, Margaret Cho, Christopher Shyer.
More from Variety
Florence Pugh Says ‘I’ve Had Good and Bad’ Intimacy Coordinators and the Job Is ‘Still Figuring Itself Out’: ‘I’ve Had a S— Example Where Someone Made It So Awkward’
‘Louis Theroux Podcast’ Sets Season 6 Guests: Florence Pugh, David Byrne, Malala Yousafzai and More (EXCLUSIVE)
Andrew Garfield Won’t Be Returning for ‘The Social Network’ Sequel: Eduardo Saverin Is in ‘Singapore Having a Good Time’
Andrew Garfield Says ‘No, Unequivocally F—ing No’ When Asked About Spider-Man in ‘Avengers: Doomsday’
Florence Pugh Speaks Up for Palestine: ‘Silence in the Face of Such Suffering Is Not Neutrality. It Is Complicity’
Florence Pugh Says ‘Midsommar’ Led to Six Months of Depression Because ‘I’d Abused Myself’: ‘I Just Can’t Exhaust Myself Like That’ Again
Loading comments...
Most Popular
Original ‘Naked Gun’ Director Says Reboot Was ‘Trying to Copy Our Style’: ‘Everybody’s in It for the Money’
Mahesh Babu, S.S. Rajamouli and Priyanka Chopra Jonas Epic Adventure Titled ‘Varanasi,’ First Footage Unveiled
Glen Powell Brings His UPS Driver to Crash ‘SNL’ Monologue: ‘He Thought It Was a Scam, But He Still Came’
Jon Voight Begs Trump to ‘Terminate’ Zohran Mamdani’s NYC Mayor Win: ‘Only He Can Stop This Horror’
President Trump Downplays Jeffrey Epstein Email Scandal on ‘SNL,’ Offers to Sell Copies of Infamous ‘Blowing Bubba’ Message
Box Office: ‘Now You See Me 3’ Captures First Place With $21.3 Million, ‘Running Man’ Stumbles With $17 Million Debut
CFL Grey Cup 2025: How to Watch Montreal Alouettes vs. Saskatchewan Roughriders Canadian Football Game Live Online
Dan McGrath, Emmy-Winning Writer for ‘The Simpsons,’ Dies at 61
Ken Burns on ‘The American Revolution,’ Going on Joe Rogan and the Future of Our Country: ‘We Can Get Better’
FCC Chairman Reposts Donald Trump’s Call for NBC to Fire Seth Meyers ‘Immediately'
Must Read
Film
COVER | Dwayne Johnson, Emily Blunt and Benny Safdie’s Underdog ‘The Smashing Machine
TV
‘I’m at a Loss Without the Show’: Inside the Final Days of ‘Stranger Things’ and the Cast’s Heartbreaking Goodbyes
TV
How the ‘Stranger Things’ Premiere Also Worked as Damage Control for Star David Harbour
Digital
‘Israel Did Not Kill Charlie Kirk. That Is Insane!’: The World According to Hasan Piker
Film
Tatsuya Nakadai, Japanese Film Legend That Starred in ‘Ran’ and ‘Harakiri,’ Dies at 92
Sign Up for Variety Newsletters
Sign Up
Sign Up
By providing your information, you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy. We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. // This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
Variety Confidential

A Variety and iHeartRadio Podcast

More From Our Brands
Rolling Stone
Jack White, Post Malone, Lil Jon to Headline 2025 NFL Thanksgiving Day Halftime Shows
Robb Report
Meet Strangelove, the Cult-Favorite Fragrance House Powered by Oud
Sportico
Under Armour’s CEO Just Did the Thing He ‘Couldn’t Imagine’
About Us
Advertise
Media Kit
Careers
Legal
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
California Privacy Rights
AdChoices
Your Privacy Choices
Accessibility
Magazine
Customer Service
Back Issues
Subscribe
Help
More
Newsletters
Archives
Events
Luminate
Connect
Instagram
Twitter
YouTube
Facebook
LinkedIn
Variety

The Business of Entertainment

SUBSCRIBE TODAY
Variety is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2025 Variety Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Variety and the Flying V logos are trademarks of Variety Media, LLC. Powered by WordPress.com VIP
Have a News Tip? Let us know
ad
Your Privacy Rights
Close privacy/terms of use policy
PMC, its service providers, and third-party partners collect information about you and how you use our services (including clicks and screen recordings) using first and third-party cookies, pixels, and similar technologies. Learn about our data practices and your choices in our Privacy Policy. By continuing to use our services, you agree to our Terms of Use (including to waiver and arbitration).

Variety is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2025 Variety Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Variety and the Flying V logos are trademarks of Variety Media, LLC.

OUR SITES