URL: https://datebook.sfchronicle.com/movies-tv/review-james-camerons-ego-turns-avatar-the-way-of-water-into-endless-torture
Title: Review: James Cameron's ego turns 'Avatar: The Way of Water' into endless torture | Datebook

EVENT SEARCH
MOVIES & TV
MUSIC
THEATER
DANCE
ART & EXHIBITS
CLASSICAL
BOOKS
TERMS OF USE
PRIVACY NOTICE
YOUR PRIVACY CHOICES
FOLLOW US
   
EVENT SEARCH
MOVIES & TV
MUSIC
THEATER
DANCE
ART & EXHIBITS
CLASSICAL
BOOKS
MOVIES & TV
Review: James Cameron’s ego turns ‘Avatar: The Way of Water’ into endless torture
Mick LaSalle December 13, 2022Updated: December 15, 2022, 5:47 pm
Jake Sully (Sam Worthington) in “Avatar: The Way of Water.”
Photo: 20th Century Studios

“Avatar: The Way of Water” is a one-hour story rattling around in a 192-minute bag. There was potential here for something lovely, a sweet and moving environmental parable clocking in at 90 minutes, tops.

But, no, James Cameron can’t do anything so modest. Instead, he bloats it with ego and, by some bizarre impulse, shows off every single idea he and a team of screenwriters imagined for this world since the original “Avatar” debuted in 2009.

The result is a self-important, larded, smothered movie that’s work to sit through. It might even put you to sleep, unless you watch with Dolby sound, which rumbles through the chairs every time someone starts an engine.

It takes place in the future, on a planet called Pandora, where everyone is blue, athletic and computer-generated. An Earthling, Jake Sully (Sam Worthington), whose spirit has been transferred into a Pandoran body, is living in marital bliss with his Pandoran wife Neytiri (Zoe Saldaña). Everything is great for about 20 years.

It looks pretty good, too. Though the visual texture of “The Way of Water” looks less like film and more like a glossy video for a high-end resort, this movie represents one of the best uses of 3-D to date, with visuals that seem to have been conceived in three dimensions.

James Cameron has COVID — and an extravagant new ‘Avatar’ sequel

Neytiri (Zoe Saldaña) and Jake Sully (Sam Worthington) in “Avatar: The Way of Water.”
Photo: 20th Century Studios

Unfortunately, every futuristic fantasy must be about a war. So, one day, just as Jake is contemplating how happy he is with his wife and four kids, the “sky people” return. In this not-so distant future, the Earth has become an environmental disaster, so the plan is to take over Pandora and repopulate the planet with homo sapiens.

That, essentially, is the story of “The Way of Water.” The rest is extra — some of the filler is fine, but most we can do without. For example, did you know that when two Pandoran people meet for the first time, a gesture of respect is to mime pulling something out of their nose?

Cameron locates everything universally good in the Pandoran people and everything evil in the human beings; in a fable, that might have worked. But “The Way of Water” isn’t intended as a fable, but as a profound environmental pronouncement. In that context, Cameron’s self-hating humanness seems reductive and naive, not the product of serious thought but of an impulse to show off.

The gravity with which Cameron presents the Pandorans would be laughable, if only it were just a little more fun. “My grandfather gave me that bow on his deathbed!” Neytiri says of her bow and arrow. Of course he did. Death is a major production on Pandora. Folks say something wise and amazing, just as their spirits ascend to join the ancestors.

Trinity Bliss, as Tuk, in “Avatar: The Way of Water.”
Photo: 20th Century Studios

Meanwhile, the movie’s main intention seems to have been length. We get long, repetitive digressions about the Sully kids’ relationships with other Pandoran youngsters. We discover that there are coastal Pandorans, with subtle physical differences from the forest Pandorans. (The coastals have thicker tails and can hold their breath underwater longer.)

We meet a sympathetic whale-like creature, and not only do we find out his backstory, we learn about his outcast status among other whale-like creatures. We also get to see various Pandorans arguing over whether this outcast should be scorned by the Pandoran people. And on and on and on … Cameron even takes time here to reprise moments from “The Abyss” and “Titanic.”

On more than one occasion we’re told that “the way of water has no beginning and no end.” No kidding. By the finish, we’ve figured that out: “The Way of Water” starts where the first left off and stops with the promise of sequels. Long, long sequels.

That’s not a promise. It’s a threat.

K
“Avatar: The Way of Water”: Fantasy. Starring Sam Worthington, Zoe Saldaña and Sigourney Weaver. Directed by James Cameron. (PG-13. 192 minutes.) In theaters starting Friday, Dec. 16.

Follow:
Mick LaSalle
Mick LaSalle is the film critic emeritus of the Chronicle. Email: askmicklasalle@gmail.com

Your weekly guide to Bay Area arts & entertainment.

Related Movies
FIND SHOWTIMES
X
Horror
FIND SHOWTIMES
Lunana: A Yak in the Classroom
Drama
FIND SHOWTIMES
Doctor Strange 3D
Action
PG-13
FOLLOW US
   
WEBSITES
SFChronicle
SFGATE
Datebook
GreenState
ABOUT
Our Company
Terms of Use
Privacy Notice
CA Notice at Collection
Your CA Privacy Rights (Shine the Light)
DAA Industry Opt Out
Careers
Advertising
CONTACT
Customer Service
FAQ
Contact Newsroom
SERVICES
Subscriber Services
e-Edition
App
Archives
Store
Subscription Offers
Your Privacy Choices (Opt Out of Sale/Targeted Ads)

© 2025 Hearst Communications, Inc.