URL: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-front-row/the-smashing-machine-pulls-its-punches
Title: “The Smashing Machine” Pulls Its Punches | The New Yorker

Skip to main content
Newsletter
Sign In
Search
The Latest
News
Books & Culture
Fiction & Poetry
Humor & Cartoons
Magazine
Puzzles & Games
Video
Podcasts
Goings On
Shop
100th Anniversary
The Front Row
“The Smashing Machine” Pulls Its Punches
Despite Dwayne (the Rock) Johnson’s taut performance, Benny Safdie’s bio-pic about the mixed-martial-arts fighter Mark Kerr proves distanced and passionless.
By Richard Brody
September 30, 2025
Photograph courtesy A24

Only two kinds of actors are bad: those who can’t be themselves and those who you wish wouldn’t be. All the rest are likely to shine in movies by good directors, and most actors whose reputations aren’t illustriously artistic have mainly been unfortunate in their collaborations. Dwayne (the Rock) Johnson has long been in my private pantheon of actors who are awaiting their showcase, ever since his performance in Michael Bay’s “Pain & Gain,” from 2013. Since then, Johnson has piled hit atop hit without stretching his artistry; now, in the title role of “The Smashing Machine,” Benny Safdie’s bio-pic about the former mixed-martial-arts star Mark Kerr, Johnson does the substantial work of bringing a noteworthy character to life, by infusing the role with his own expansive personality—perhaps unsurprisingly, given his background as a professional wrestler. It’s a performance of flair and precision and imparts emotion to a script that lacks it.

“The Smashing Machine,” which Safdie both wrote and directed, portrays Mark (the character, as distinguished from the real-life Kerr) from the time of his first bout in the Ultimate Fighting Championship, in 1997, to 2000. The period begins with victories and growing fame—though his achievements are shadowed and threatened by substance-abuse issues and conflict with his girlfriend, Dawn Staples (Emily Blunt)—and peters out with his climactic defeat in a big-money tournament that owes its high financial stakes to his earlier success. Safdie’s approach to the story is divided against itself: as a writer, he takes an analytical view, creating scenes that clearly exemplify the fighter’s powers and troubles and the personality traits that contribute to both; but he films the story with loose documentary-like sequences and large-scale spectacle, neither of which matches the script’s expressive precision.

That’s where Johnson’s acting comes in. Paradoxically, his performance draws strength from the narrow focus of Safdie’s writing, which enables him to flesh out the specific trait, feeling, or impulse that each scene exemplifies, slotting them together like tiles in a mosaic to form Mark’s character. The most fascinating of these traits is shown early on, when a journalist interviews Mark after his first triumph. As Mark describes his strategies, his reflections quickly outleap the specifics of the sport and take on a philosophical dimension. He starts with the simple part: his need to “really assert” himself on his opponent. Then he frames victory in psychological terms, saying, “I’m going to physically impose my will onto” the person in the ring who has the temerity to fight him: “You really feel when that happens, when the person just lets go and totally withers away in your arms.” He describes inflicting pain in gory detail, and, as if hearing the implications of his own thoughts, says that everything “felt very evolutionary,” a sublimely sidelong word for actions and emotions that he recognizes as atavistic and feral.

Safdie’s presentation of these comments foregrounds Mark’s understanding of what’s profound, and profoundly disturbing, about mixed martial arts, and perhaps all martial arts—the channelling and professionalizing of brutality. The scene sets the tone for the entire film, but it’s a height that Safdie can’t sustain. He delivers a rational movie on an irrational subject, an externalized film on a story of subjective depths. Safdie is obviously fascinated by the fighter’s psychology, but he doesn’t successfully dramatize the extremity of Mark’s experiences—except in negative form, by way of his difficulty fitting into the norms of a noncombatant life style.

Mark lives with Dawn in bland comfort in suburban Phoenix, but there’s nothing bland about the way he makes his living, and the conditions that this imposes on his daily routine place enormous stress on the couple’s relationship; Dawn thinks of Mark’s athletic career as a job, whereas, for him, it’s a comprehensive way of life. He declares, before another match, that, to succeed, he has to remain “one-hundred-per-cent concentrated” or else his “emotions will be running around everywhere,” and some of the movie’s most striking moments—and some of Johnson’s most impressive acting—involve Mark’s ironclad concentration when events are spinning out of control. His domestic life entails set regimens, including precise dietary requirements, and when Dawn gets the ingredients of his morning shake wrong (skim milk instead of whole, half a banana instead of one and a half bananas), he doesn’t rant or even criticize, but coolly dumps it out and makes himself another. His eerie calm seems to irritate Dawn even more than a candidly emotional confrontation would have done.

Dawn (a grievously underwritten character whom Blunt conjures with sheer actorly energy) is devoted and sympathetic but out of touch with the absolute, quasi-monastic nature of Mark’s athletic calling. (The script never makes clear whether their relationship had been different prior to his fighting début.) She joins him at the gym and helps him stretch, but her inability to pierce the solitude at the core of his pursuit drives her to a reckless decision that proves consequential. It leads to the movie’s best dramatic scene, one that plays to Safdie’s rational strengths. When Mark is in Japan to make his début on a mixed-martial-arts circuit called Pride, Dawn flies over and surprises him there, showing up in his locker room at exactly the wrong moment, just as he’s preparing to enter the ring for a bout. He barely acknowledges her presence, putting himself into a tightly controlled state of pressurized ferocity so intensely focussed and isolated, detached from all other concerns and thoughts, that she asks him if he’s high. (In pressing him for attention, she merely breaks his trance and, as the movie makes clear, is partly to blame for his bad results.) Johnson’s performance here is transcendent in its simplicity; doing as little as possible by means of will power, displaying an intense remoteness and an active impassivity, he strikingly evokes an athlete’s competitive self-sublimation.

Johnson exudes a preternatural sense of restraint throughout, endowing Mark with a calm that seems held together with inner bonds of steel that, should one of them slip even a bit, would unleash the hellish furies that he strives to reserve for the ring. Back home in Phoenix, when the couple’s relationship reaches a crisis point, Mark offers a brief but terrifying view of the violence he’s holding in when not fighting. But this is merely a piece in a puzzle; Mark’s traits get emblematized rather than developed. His self-control isn’t just a matter of mind games but also of medication. Along with the infliction of pain, the sport entails the endurance of pain; to cope, he becomes dependent on opioids, and, after an overdose, goes to rehab. Yet the movie shows no struggle, no introspection, but, rather, a nonchalantly reasonable ability to drop his stash into a garbage can and walk away.

The movie offers so little of the couple’s life, so little of their shared interests, of their ideas and their observations and their ordinary talk, that what is disclosed comes across as mere dramatic convenience. The relationships that Mark forms in the course of his career are similarly simplified—principally, his hearty bromance with Mark Coleman (Ryan Bader), who is first his trainer and then, entering the circuit himself, a competitor. This change in role appears to have no consequences whatsoever in the two Marks’ friendship. In public, Mark Kerr speaks amiably about his trainer turned rival and even takes him along for a rowdy impromptu meet-and-greet, but the lack of friction comes off less as a sign of his unflappability than of Safdie’s indifference to probing a friendship beyond buddy-comedy depth. Mark’s bond with another trainer, Bas Rutten (played by the real-life former wrestler and broadcaster Bas Rutten), is similarly superficial.

As for the sport itself, Safdie illustrates it ably but impersonally. The fight scenes display mere curiosity about the sport but no enthusiasm for it or insight into its inner dimensions. They’re informative but not emotional, lacking a sense of awe or horror or any other extreme experience; they simply log the strategies, details, and outcomes, without even analytical fascination. “The Smashing Machine” doesn’t consider the specifics of mixed martial arts, such as its differences from Olympic-style wrestling (where Kerr got his start) or from the tightly formatted, quasi-balletic ways of boxing. One quick line, in which an elderly woman recognizes Mark’s sport as one that was threatened with a legal ban, suggests both its controversy and its singularity, but the subject is dropped as casually as it’s mentioned. Safdie takes a story of passion and fury, of rage and torment, and reduces it to the arm’s-length mode of the interesting. Only Johnson’s committed, precise, and vigorous performance suggests the power that inherently surges through the story and that the movie leaves nearly untapped. ♦

New Yorker Favorites

In the weeks before John Wayne Gacy’s scheduled execution, he was far from reconciled to his fate.

What HBO’s “Chernobyl” got right, and what it got terribly wrong.

Why does the Bible end that way?

A new era of strength competitions is testing the limits of the human body.

How an unemployed blogger confirmed that Syria had used chemical weapons.

An essay by Toni Morrison: “The Work You Do, the Person You Are.”

Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.

Richard Brody, a film critic, began writing for The New Yorker in 1999. He is the author of “Everything Is Cinema: The Working Life of Jean-Luc Godard.”
More:
Movie Reviews
Mixed Martial Arts
Biopics
Read More
The Front Row
The Joyful Mythology of “Nouvelle Vague”
Richard Linklater’s dramatization of Jean-Luc Godard’s making of “Breathless” embraces the legend of the French New Wave and its enduring influence.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Peter Hujar’s Day” Gives the Past a New Life
Ira Sachs’s film, starring Ben Whishaw as the renowned photographer and Rebecca Hall as his interviewer, is a personal memorial for the protagonist and his milieu.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Fire of Wind” Is a Bold and Inspired Début
The first feature by the Portuguese filmmaker Marta Mateus, featuring nonprofessional actors in natural settings, explores and expands modern traditions of political cinema.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Springsteen: Deliver Me from Nowhere” Tamps the Boss Down
Scott Cooper’s tightly focussed bio-pic, about the making of Bruce Springsteen’s D.I.Y. album “Nebraska,” leaves out the wide-ranging passion that went into the music.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
“Sirāt” Is a Harrowing, Exhilarating Dance of Death
In Oliver Laxe’s desert thriller, an intensely agonizing journey reveals both the pitiless nature of fate and the stubborn persistence of compassion.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
The Bad Show-Biz Dads of “Sentimental Value” and “Jay Kelly”
In new films from Joachim Trier and Noah Baumbach, success in filmmaking proves depressingly incompatible with success in fatherhood.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
Emma Stone’s Apocalyptic Showdown Blooms in “Bugonia”
In Yorgos Lanthimos’s film, ripe with eco-paranoia, the actress and Jesse Plemons come to physical and psychological blows.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
In Guillermo del Toro’s “Frankenstein,” a Vast Vision Gets Netflixed Down to Size
The latest reanimation of Mary Shelley’s classic tale, starring Oscar Isaac and Jacob Elordi, is a labyrinthine tour of a filmmaker’s career-long obsessions.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Die My Love” Is Smaller Than Life
Jennifer Lawrence and Robert Pattinson exert themselves strenuously to give this fervent drama of marriage and motherhood a semblance of reality.
By Richard Brody
Profiles
Joachim Trier Has Put Oslo on the Cinematic Map
His new film, “Sentimental Value,” is another intimate character study set in the Norwegian capital. His approach to directing is as empathic as his films.
By Margaret Talbot
Screening Room
The Dream of Finishing One’s To-Do List in “Retirement Plan”
In John Kelly’s animated short film, narrated by Domhnall Gleeson, nothing’s off limits when it comes to thinking about the future—particularly when there’s so much left to do.
By David Sedaris
Onward and Upward with the Arts
Rian Johnson Is an Agatha Christie for the Netflix Age
The director revived the cozy mystery with “Knives Out.” In a new sequel, can he find his way to the end of the maze?
By Anna Russell

Sections

NewsBooks & CultureFiction & PoetryHumor & CartoonsMagazineCrosswordVideoPodcasts100th AnniversaryGoings On

More

Manage AccountShop The New YorkerBuy Covers and CartoonsCondé Nast StoreDigital AccessNewslettersJigsaw PuzzleRSSSite Map
AboutCareersContactF.A.Q.Media KitPressAccessibility HelpUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy Rights

© 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices

Your Privacy Choices