URL: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-current-cinema/the-shrewdly-regenerative-apocalypse-of-28-years-later
Title: The Shrewdly Regenerative Apocalypse of “28 Years Later” | The New Yorker

Skip to main content
Newsletter
Sign In
Search
The Latest
News
Books & Culture
Fiction & Poetry
Humor & Cartoons
Magazine
Puzzles & Games
Video
Podcasts
Goings On
Shop
100th Anniversary
The Current Cinema
The Shrewdly Regenerative Apocalypse of “28 Years Later”
Decades after “28 Days Later,” the director Danny Boyle and the screenwriter Alex Garland return to—and advance—a frighteningly effective franchise.
By Justin Chang
June 25, 2025
Alfie Williams and Aaron Taylor-Johnson in “28 Years Later.”Photograph by Miya Mizuno / Columbia Pictures / Everett

Perhaps because cannibalism comes with the territory, the zombie movie has proved uncommonly immune to a certain strain of critical attack: the kind that instinctively finds fault with the derivative. This is a subset of splatter cinema that endures, in no small part, by feeding on its own touchstones. The sinewy, politically charged masterworks of the late George A. Romero, “Night of the Living Dead” (1968) and “Dawn of the Dead” (1978) not least among them, have nourished the brains of aspiring horror auteurs the world over. In more recent years, every remotely viable genre anomaly has been swiftly replicated. “Shaun of the Dead” (2004), with its wry manipulations of tone, anticipated a wave of gleefully irreverent zom-coms; two fiendishly clever thrillers from East Asia, “Train to Busan” (2016) and “One Cut of the Dead” (2019), spawned offshoots of their own. Meanwhile, the popularity of shows like “The Walking Dead,” which was inspired by a series of comic books, and, more recently, “The Last of Us,” from a video game, suggests the form’s ease of transmission from one medium to the next.

I was thus more intrigued than dismayed to hear that the British duo Danny Boyle and Alex Garland were reuniting—as director and screenwriter, respectively—for “28 Years Later,” renewing a collaboration that began, decades ago, with their sensational thriller “28 Days Later.” First released in the U.K. in 2002, “28 Days Later” envisioned an eerily desolate London, emptied out in the wake of a fast-spreading “rage virus” that had reduced most of the English population to flesh-chomping predators—zombies, in other words, although the film refers to them simply as “the infected.” Compared with Romero’s slow-shambling stalkers, Boyle’s rampaging hordes were unrepentant speed demons, and they pushed the genre to new peaks of breath-sapping intensity. So did the cinematographer Anthony Dod Mantle’s jostling handheld camerawork and striking use of digital video, which grounded these fresh horrors in the mundanity of the here and now.

Although “28 Years Later” kicks off with a brief, unnerving prologue, set during the early days of the outbreak, none of the characters from “28 Days Later” reappear. As for the events of “28 Weeks Later”—an underappreciated 2007 sequel, directed by the Spanish filmmaker Juan Carlos Fresnadillo—they appear to have been written out of the series’ time line altogether. By the end of that film, a batch of the infected had made it to France, implying that the virus would soon overtake the European continent and the rest of the world. But early on in the new film, we are informed that the infection was, in fact, successfully contained; twenty-eight years after the initial outbreak, the U.K. alone remains under quarantine. It’s a sharp, unmistakable jab at Brexit isolationism, right down to the small minority of uninfected survivors who have been left, with cruel indifference, to fend for themselves.

Among these survivors is a twelve-year-old boy, Spike (Alfie Williams), who is growing up in a small commune that appears to be one of the few remnants of English civilization. The village sits on an island, connected to the mainland by a narrow causeway that is accessible only at low tide. The residents have learned to coexist peacefully, and to share and conserve their limited resources. (Water is scarce, but booze appears plentiful.) When supplies run low, a brave few make brief treks to the mainland to hunt and gather. The world-building here is so vivid, inventive, and atmospheric that I would gladly have watched a movie devoted entirely to the origins of this island village: the drafting of laws and regulations, the erection of wooden barricades and barbed wire, the fending-off of bloodthirsty attackers, and the gradual yet steady emergence of a viable way of life.

But Boyle and Garland, bound by the imperatives of genre, rush through the setup with a deft, workmanlike efficiency. They’re interested in this human-made oasis purely to the extent that they can venture beyond it. Spike’s father, Jamie (Aaron Taylor-Johnson), believes that the lad is old enough, and sufficiently skilled with a bow and arrow, to make his first trip off the island. Spike’s mother, the pointedly named Isla (Jodie Comer), thinks he’s too young, and she rails against Jamie, her anger exacerbated by a mysterious illness that has left her delirious and depleted. The plot is bifurcated to grant father and mother equal dramatic weight. The first half covers Spike’s mainland indoctrination, as Jamie trains him in survival and—as the infected rear their putrescent heads—helps him score his first kills. The film’s second half tracks Spike’s even more harrowing journey with the increasingly sickly Isla, in hopes that she may be healed by an eccentric medicine man, Dr. Kelson (Ralph Fiennes), who has developed ingenious strategies for living on the mainland, in surprising harmony, among the world’s deadliest predators. (Kelson is essentially a more benevolent version of “Apocalypse Now” ’s Colonel Kurtz, unmistakably deranged but with his humanity intact, and Fiennes, his steady gaze betraying a gleam of mad, transgressive excitement, honors the comparison to the hilt.)

The infected have themselves bred and evolved over the decades, and they now come in two easily recognizable types. Some are heavy-set and easy to outrun; they crawl slowly on the ground and prefer the taste of worms to human flesh. The others are far more vicious; they shun clothing, hunt in packs, and answer to hulking male leaders known as Alphas, who are fond of decapitating their prey with their bare hands. (They are also so generously and prosthetically over-endowed, it’s a wonder that all that flopping doesn’t impede their speed on the ground.) It takes more than an arrow to the neck to bring down an Alpha, but the others can be quickly defeated, so you can’t fault Boyle and his editor, Jon Harris, for supplying gratuitous instant-replay montages of the grisliest kills, so as to savor every burst of exploding viscera. Mantle is happily back behind the camera here, and his fleet, frenzied style has undergone significant mutations of its own. Much of the film was shot using enhanced iPhone cameras, all the better to capture the many chase and combat sequences with a nimble, lightweight virtuosity. But Mantle’s hurtling images also retain a signature smeariness, in which moody washes of gray meld, evocatively, with painterly daubs of green, and a golden sunset over the northern English coast can still inspire a measure of awe. He shows us a world that, for all its terror, has not yet relinquished its natural beauty.

In recent years, Garland has become a formidable filmmaker in his own right, and in films like “Ex Machina” (2014), “Annihilation” (2018), and “Civil War” (2024) he has made frighteningly plausible dystopia a personal specialty. Boyle, for his part, has injected “28 Years Later” with all the wit and exuberance that was absent from his previous picture, the dismal musical comedy “Yesterday” (2019), which imagined a world in which the Beatles never existed—speculative horror of a different kind.

There is, though, an amusing if surely unintended link between “Yesterday” and “28 Years Later,” insofar as the latter film’s surviving characters are sealed off in a cultural vacuum of their own. Spike has a Power Rangers action figure, but, having never previously left the island, he has no knowledge of smartphones, the internet, or Botox. He also hasn’t read “Hamlet,” something that Kelson discovers in one of the film’s best throwaway jokes—one that feels all the more playfully apt coming from a Shakespearean as seasoned as Fiennes. Underscoring the “Hamlet” reference, Kelson spends considerable time interacting with human skulls, which he has collected and assembled into a towering monument to the dead with shades of Vereshchagin’s 1871 painting “The Apotheosis of War.”

Garland’s script thus betrays a fascination with culture, and with the role of art in both the rehabilitation of civilization and the memorialization of suffering. From start to finish, “28 Years Later” unleashes a cascade of allusions—an early nod to “Teletubbies” is somehow the most ominous—that give the film a quality of self-reflexivity, a clear understanding of what it is and where, in the motion-picture annals, it belongs. As Spike and Jamie walk across the causeway, Boyle boldly splices in black-and-white footage of young British soldiers marching off to battle during the Second World War, and Technicolor clips from Laurence Olivier’s “Henry V,” a film that was gratefully received, in 1944, by war-weary British audiences. (In a cumulative flourish, Boyle sets these passages to Taylor Holmes’s chilling recitation of “Boots,” Rudyard Kipling’s 1903 poem about the monotony of life as a British soldier during the Second Boer War.)

Such mock-ennobling of the English warrior spirit gives the film’s Brexit subtext an extra-caustic bite. But the anti-militaristic strain is, if anything, less pronounced here than it was in “28 Days Later,” in which a band of self-styled soldiers proved more loathsome than the infected themselves, or in “28 Weeks Later,” which took none-too-subtle aim at the U.S. occupation of Iraq. This time, Boyle and Garland have a sharper, nastier provocation in mind. They have given “28 Years Later” a final twist that, although amply foreshadowed, jerks the story in a startling, violently funny direction. In the film’s initial week of release, this coda has already been greeted with varying degrees of shock, confusion, and hilarity; for audiences in the U.K., I suspect, it has elicited a particularly queasy sense of recognition. Suffice to say that Boyle and Garland maintain their pop-cultural savvy to the end, and that none of their characters’ names—watch the prologue carefully—have been chosen idly.

The ending serves as a handy reminder that the zombie movie, more than perhaps any other strain of horror cinema, can be a potent conductor of allegory, metaphor, and polemic. It also serves, somewhat more dispiritingly, to reëstablish the parameters of a franchise. “28 Years Later” is not only the third film in a series but the first film in a new trilogy, the second installment of which—“28 Years Later: The Bone Temple,” directed by Nia DaCosta—is set to be released in January. None of this is objectionable, let alone surprising; the careful packaging, consumption, and regurgitation of story material, as noted earlier, is less a bug than a feature of the genre. But it can’t help but retroactively impart a certain roteness to the narrative, which feels trapped, with mechanical “gotcha” efficiency, between two bookends.

The film’s most resonant moments and implications lie elsewhere—chiefly, in Spike’s relationships with his parents. Throughout “28 Years Later,” Boyle and Garland take strategic aim at what some might categorize as toxic masculinity—a societal tendency to exalt young men with an aptitude for violence—and seem to lift up, in the figure of Isla, a vision of redemptive femininity. To spell out this dichotomy, though, is to give it far clunkier emphasis than the script does. The actors provide the nuances, with stirring grace: just as Taylor-Johnson tempers Jamie’s own alpha machismo with a gentle, unfeigned paternal tenderness, so the extraordinary Comer gives Isla, even at her most despairing, an astonishing toughness of body, mind, and spirit. Even near the end, dwarfed by a tower of skulls, it is Comer whose wrenching performance gestures toward the monumental. ♦

New Yorker Favorites

In the weeks before John Wayne Gacy’s scheduled execution, he was far from reconciled to his fate.

What HBO’s “Chernobyl” got right, and what it got terribly wrong.

Why does the Bible end that way?

A new era of strength competitions is testing the limits of the human body.

How an unemployed blogger confirmed that Syria had used chemical weapons.

An essay by Toni Morrison: “The Work You Do, the Person You Are.”

Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.

Justin Chang is a film critic at The New Yorker. He won the 2024 Pulitzer Prize for criticism.
More:
Zombies
Thrillers
Movie Reviews
Films
Danny Boyle
Horror
Read More
The Current Cinema
“Sirāt” Is a Harrowing, Exhilarating Dance of Death
In Oliver Laxe’s desert thriller, an intensely agonizing journey reveals both the pitiless nature of fate and the stubborn persistence of compassion.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Peter Hujar’s Day” Gives the Past a New Life
Ira Sachs’s film, starring Ben Whishaw as the renowned photographer and Rebecca Hall as his interviewer, is a personal memorial for the protagonist and his milieu.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
In Guillermo del Toro’s “Frankenstein,” a Vast Vision Gets Netflixed Down to Size
The latest reanimation of Mary Shelley’s classic tale, starring Oscar Isaac and Jacob Elordi, is a labyrinthine tour of a filmmaker’s career-long obsessions.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Springsteen: Deliver Me from Nowhere” Tamps the Boss Down
Scott Cooper’s tightly focussed bio-pic, about the making of Bruce Springsteen’s D.I.Y. album “Nebraska,” leaves out the wide-ranging passion that went into the music.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
The Bad Show-Biz Dads of “Sentimental Value” and “Jay Kelly”
In new films from Joachim Trier and Noah Baumbach, success in filmmaking proves depressingly incompatible with success in fatherhood.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
The Joyful Mythology of “Nouvelle Vague”
Richard Linklater’s dramatization of Jean-Luc Godard’s making of “Breathless” embraces the legend of the French New Wave and its enduring influence.
By Richard Brody
The Front Row
“Fire of Wind” Is a Bold and Inspired Début
The first feature by the Portuguese filmmaker Marta Mateus, featuring nonprofessional actors in natural settings, explores and expands modern traditions of political cinema.
By Richard Brody
Profiles
Joachim Trier Has Put Oslo on the Cinematic Map
His new film, “Sentimental Value,” is another intimate character study set in the Norwegian capital. His approach to directing is as empathic as his films.
By Margaret Talbot
The Current Cinema
Emma Stone’s Apocalyptic Showdown Blooms in “Bugonia”
In Yorgos Lanthimos’s film, ripe with eco-paranoia, the actress and Jesse Plemons come to physical and psychological blows.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Die My Love” Is Smaller Than Life
Jennifer Lawrence and Robert Pattinson exert themselves strenuously to give this fervent drama of marriage and motherhood a semblance of reality.
By Richard Brody
Onward and Upward with the Arts
Rian Johnson Is an Agatha Christie for the Netflix Age
The director revived the cozy mystery with “Knives Out.” In a new sequel, can he find his way to the end of the maze?
By Anna Russell
Profiles
Jennifer Lawrence Goes Dark
She has been cast in maternal roles since her teens. Now, playing a mother for the first time since becoming one, she has chosen the part of a woman pushed past the edge of sanity.
By Jia Tolentino

Sections

NewsBooks & CultureFiction & PoetryHumor & CartoonsMagazineCrosswordVideoPodcasts100th AnniversaryGoings On

More

Manage AccountShop The New YorkerBuy Covers and CartoonsCondé Nast StoreDigital AccessNewslettersJigsaw PuzzleRSSSite Map
AboutCareersContactF.A.Q.Media KitPressAccessibility HelpUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy Rights

© 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices

Your Privacy Choices