URL: https://www.newyorker.com/culture/the-front-row/the-political-trickery-of-eddington
Title: The Political Trickery of “Eddington” | The New Yorker

Skip to main content
Newsletter
Sign In
Search
The Latest
News
Books & Culture
Fiction & Poetry
Humor & Cartoons
Magazine
Puzzles & Games
Video
Podcasts
Goings On
Shop
100th Anniversary
The Front Row
The Political Trickery of “Eddington”
Ari Aster’s drama, set in 2020, about conflict between a New Mexico town’s sheriff and its mayor, rips plotlines from the headlines and leaves them in shreds.
By Richard Brody
September 5, 2025
Photograph by Richard Foreman / A24

Afilmmaker who wanted to make a politically contentious movie couldn’t do much better than to set it in mid-2020, when the United States, under the covid-19 lockdown and approaching a Presidential election, was tearing itself apart over masking mandates and then over the fallout from the killing of George Floyd. This is precisely what Ari Aster’s recent film “Eddington” does, wading with apparent boldness into a slew of issues that remain divisive even five years on. Strangely enough, though, if he had removed the covid and protest plotlines entirely, the movie would be more or less the same. Its run time might be shorter, but its emotional essence, thematic core, and even the motivations that drive its characters would remain intact. Although the story is steeped in the practicalities of that moment and the controversies they aroused, it’s ultimately driven by something else altogether; namely, sexual humiliation. “Eddington” is a fundamentally manospherical movie, in which the insistence on the politics of covid and race is little more than facile posturing.

The film is set in New Mexico, in the fictitious title town—population of two thousand four hundred and thirty-five, according to a road sign—where the election year sees the mayor also up for reëlection. The incumbent, Ted Garcia (Pedro Pascal), who lives in upper-middle-class comfort with his teen-age son, Eric (Matt Gomez Hidaka)—and without his ex-wife, who left him long ago—is intent on enforcing the state’s mask mandate. His nemesis, who impulsively decides to run against him, is the town’s sheriff, Joe Cross (Joaquin Phoenix), who is skeptical of masking. He lives in a cluttered house with his wife, Louise (Emma Stone), an artist, and her mother, Dawn (Deirdre O’Connell), an online obsessive in thrall to QAnon-like conspiracy theorists.

Joe’s decision to run comes about after two incidents involving social media. First, when Ted holds a town-council meeting in a bar that he owns, Joe is called to remove a ranting homeless man named Lodge (Clifton Collins, Jr.) and is injured in the resulting tussle. Adding insult to injury, Eric and his friend Brian (Cameron Mann) film the incident and plan to post the embarrassing video on social media. Soon after, a video of Joe defying the mask mandate in a local supermarket ends up online and draws praise by denialists. Stoked, Joe announces his candidacy to run against Ted, immediately recording a video and posting it. Then he returns to the station and dubiously insists that his two young deputies, Guy (Luke Grimes) and Michael (Micheal Ward), work on the campaign—starting right now.

So far, so political. But the conflict between Joe and Ted goes back further and is rooted in a deep loam of backstory that emerges bit by bit. Joe has long believed that his wife, Louise, had a sexual relationship with Ted when she was sixteen. Dawn believes so, too, but Louise denies it. Early in the film, Joe watches a video about persuading a reluctant partner to have a child and then, in bed with Louise, tries to initiate sex. She backs away; it’s clear that she’s been rejecting him for a while. Dawn goads Joe about Ted, suggesting that Louise’s late father, who was also sheriff, would have taken action. Then, while Joe is in his sheriff’s S.U.V., recording a ranty campaign video, Eric rides up on a bike and taunts him, “Tell them about the time my dad dumped your wife.” Later, he’s even nastier: “What about your fucking crazy whore wife?” Joe takes his accusations against Ted public; Louise repudiates them publicly.

The true politics of “Eddington,” then, are sexual politics. When they result in criminal violence, it becomes clear that the movie’s essence is that of a film noir and that its wider political gestures are just ornamental. The centrality of sexual politics isn’t only dramatic and thematic; it also governs the film’s aesthetic. For the most part, this aesthetic is unremarkable; “Eddington” offers a tightly crafted story filmed with blandly efficient professionalism, saving its most energetic touches for rendering violence with shock and gore. But there is one exception, a scene whose dramatic importance is reflected in a startling inventiveness of composition, and whose stylistic finesse provides a clue about where Aster’s emotional investment lies. It’s the only scene in the movie with a distinctive cinematic identity.

In this scene, Joe—having by now posted a video calling Ted a sexual predator—shows up at Ted’s house, responding to a noise complaint, to find a campaign party in full swing on the rear patio. In a single long take, Joe leaves his vehicle and strides into the crowd of guests, most of whom are masked and many of whom are watching, on a big-screen TV, the video in which Louise denies Joe’s claims. Joe angrily unplugs the screen and the camera keeps following him. As he stomps past Ted, the camera stops moving and watches Joe—as if from Ted’s point of view—as he walks farther into the party, turns off a stereo that is blaring Katy Perry’s “Firework,” turns around, and retraces his steps to leave. On the way out, he again passes Ted, who now taunts him about the discredited accusation. Then there are cuts: Joe enters the house, while Ted goes over to the sound system and cranks the music up. Joe goes back outside—again he’s seen from Ted’s perspective—and yells at him to turn the music down. Instead, Ted slaps him in the face, twice. Joe, glowering, stalks off through the crowd, clambers into his vehicle, and drives off.

With this humiliation, Joe snaps, and, in short order, commits several shocking acts of deadly violence. His brazen maneuvers to cover his tracks soon give rise to tense standoffs with another sheriff (William Belleau), a Native American, and who makes jurisdictional claims so that he can conduct his own investigation of the killings. By this point, the movie’s film-noir framework reveals ample psychological, moral, and symbolic dimensions, and one that is explicitly political—the potential for police officers to abuse their power and frame others for their own misdeeds. “Eddington,” however, never develops any of these themes: Aster is so intent on using ripped-from-the-headlines events that he fails to make proper use of them, and ends up cynically debasing them all.

If Aster uses sex to weaponize Ted and Joe’s disagreement about masking, his sexualization of the issues surrounding the George Floyd protests is even more repellent and sneering. Eric and his friend Brian both have crushes on a girl, Sarah (Amélie Hoeferle). She’s presented as a stereotypical woke white woman and social-justice warrior, boasting on Instagram about the joy of reading James Baldwin’s “Giovanni’s Room.” The boys crudely joke about her (“Blond bitches named Sarah think they’re Rosa Parks”) and Eric, being Hispanic, also jokes that Brian can use their friendship to display allyship. Sure enough, one night, at an outdoor socially distanced gathering, Brian sees Sarah carrying a book by Angela Davis, Googles the name, and starts a conversation. As the two white teens chatter on about “privileged white kids,” another girl comments that Sarah is just trying to make “her old-ass boyfriend”—a “cop”— jealous. Later, once the George Floyd protests start, Sarah, Brian, and Eric all take to the streets and, at one demonstration, Sarah confronts Michael, one of Joe’s two young deputies, who is Black and is also the “old-ass boyfriend” in question, challenging him to leave the force and join the protest. Brian piles on, calling Michael a traitor, while Sarah implores him, saying, “You should be with us.” A few days later, Brian, holding forth about “dismantling whiteness” at the family’s dinner table, is mocked by his father —“You’re white!”—and then Brian sends Michael a photo of Sarah and Eric kissing.

For Aster, the significance of the protests is twofold: first, young people make fools of themselves with their performative activism; second, the point of this is to get laid. “Eddington” shows boys whose interest in racial justice is sparked by their lust for a girl whose interest in racial justice is strongly linked to her feelings for a Black man. The movie mocks teens for the awkward and clichéd expressions of ideas, but how could they not be awkward, let alone unoriginal, when struggling, likely for the first time in their lives, with issues of national and historical significance which also involve their personal identities and family lives? Yet Aster casts their motives as unprincipled and self-serving. By contrast, Joe’s bewilderment about their assertions of racist policing—what, racism in Eddington?—is treated with absolute earnestness. The movie vulgarly sexualizes youthful political ardor and, even more contemptibly, the very notion of racial justice.

I’ve avoided mentioning another element of the movie that, while decidedly political, isn’t linked to the fateful year of 2020. A tech company is lobbying to build a large-scale data center on the outskirts of Eddington. Ted supports the project, and, at first, only one town councillor, a restaurant owner named Paula (Rachel de la Torre), opposes it. Soon, however, Joe sees the chance to make common cause with Paula—to snag his first prominent supporter by opposing the data center himself. And, just as the movie operates a double standard when it weighs issues of justice, so, too, not all conspiracy theories in “Eddington” are created equal. Joe’s mother-in-law, Dawn, long in thrall to the far-fetched theories she reads about online, introduces a charismatic fanatic (Austin Butler), who’s obsessed with pedophile rings and related depravities, into the household. Meanwhile, the tech company behind the data center sees a way to manipulate public opinion in its favor with a conspiracy of its own, a far-reaching and brazenly destructive one. The effect of these two developments—equal but opposite, as it were—is, strangely, to depoliticize the movie: a delusional rightist demagogue appears as an ideologically neutral voice for the isolated and the traumatized, while the debate around tech investment is played not as a complex mapping of the town’s social divisions and conflicting interests but as Grand Guignol fantasy.

What goes unsaid in “Eddington” is all the more noticeable for being hinted at throughout. I counted seven mentions of the word “shame” (or forms thereof), and most of them are related both to sex and to social media. Aster is obsessed with people’s unchecked power to shame others online, whether with the truth or with unfair fabrications. It’s online posting that stokes the humiliation Joe feels about Louise’s experiences with Ted to murderous heights. Likewise, the young peoples’ embarrassment about failed relationships and unfulfilled desires is magnified and intensified by the leap from private gossip to the mediascape. Aster’s devil is a tech company, and, along the way, he shakes his fist not only at its ruthless potentates but at the internet over all and at social media. In so doing, he treats his protagonists as automata, manipulated from the outside, devoid of ethical compasses or underlying ideals or prejudices. “Eddington” is filled with nostalgia for a quieter, simpler, more isolated era, when local news stayed local, when private matters weren’t made public, when the personal wasn’t political. The focus of its nostalgia is the figure of Joe, the small-town sheriff, troubled and kindly, whose old-school commonsense conservatism has been overwhelmed by the forces of modernity and driven by them into maga-styled extremes. Were Aster truly interested in the phenomenon, he’d have set the movie in 2016. ♦

An earlier version of this article misstated the identity of the town’s previous sheriff.

New Yorker Favorites

In the weeks before John Wayne Gacy’s scheduled execution, he was far from reconciled to his fate.

What HBO’s “Chernobyl” got right, and what it got terribly wrong.

Why does the Bible end that way?

A new era of strength competitions is testing the limits of the human body.

How an unemployed blogger confirmed that Syria had used chemical weapons.

An essay by Toni Morrison: “The Work You Do, the Person You Are.”

Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The New Yorker.

Richard Brody, a film critic, began writing for The New Yorker in 1999. He is the author of “Everything Is Cinema: The Working Life of Jean-Luc Godard.”
More:
Movie Reviews
Joaquin Phoenix
Pedro Pascal
Emma Stone
Covid-19 social distancing
George Floyd
Read More
The Front Row
“Peter Hujar’s Day” Gives the Past a New Life
Ira Sachs’s film, starring Ben Whishaw as the renowned photographer and Rebecca Hall as his interviewer, is a personal memorial for the protagonist and his milieu.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
Emma Stone’s Apocalyptic Showdown Blooms in “Bugonia”
In Yorgos Lanthimos’s film, ripe with eco-paranoia, the actress and Jesse Plemons come to physical and psychological blows.
By Justin Chang
The Current Cinema
In Guillermo del Toro’s “Frankenstein,” a Vast Vision Gets Netflixed Down to Size
The latest reanimation of Mary Shelley’s classic tale, starring Oscar Isaac and Jacob Elordi, is a labyrinthine tour of a filmmaker’s career-long obsessions.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
The Joyful Mythology of “Nouvelle Vague”
Richard Linklater’s dramatization of Jean-Luc Godard’s making of “Breathless” embraces the legend of the French New Wave and its enduring influence.
By Richard Brody
The Current Cinema
“Sirāt” Is a Harrowing, Exhilarating Dance of Death
In Oliver Laxe’s desert thriller, an intensely agonizing journey reveals both the pitiless nature of fate and the stubborn persistence of compassion.
By Justin Chang
Profiles
Joachim Trier Has Put Oslo on the Cinematic Map
His new film, “Sentimental Value,” is another intimate character study set in the Norwegian capital. His approach to directing is as empathic as his films.
By Margaret Talbot
The Current Cinema
The Bad Show-Biz Dads of “Sentimental Value” and “Jay Kelly”
In new films from Joachim Trier and Noah Baumbach, success in filmmaking proves depressingly incompatible with success in fatherhood.
By Justin Chang
The Front Row
“Fire of Wind” Is a Bold and Inspired Début
The first feature by the Portuguese filmmaker Marta Mateus, featuring nonprofessional actors in natural settings, explores and expands modern traditions of political cinema.
By Richard Brody
Onward and Upward with the Arts
Rian Johnson Is an Agatha Christie for the Netflix Age
The director revived the cozy mystery with “Knives Out.” In a new sequel, can he find his way to the end of the maze?
By Anna Russell
The Front Row
“Springsteen: Deliver Me from Nowhere” Tamps the Boss Down
Scott Cooper’s tightly focussed bio-pic, about the making of Bruce Springsteen’s D.I.Y. album “Nebraska,” leaves out the wide-ranging passion that went into the music.
By Richard Brody
Profiles
Jennifer Lawrence Goes Dark
She has been cast in maternal roles since her teens. Now, playing a mother for the first time since becoming one, she has chosen the part of a woman pushed past the edge of sanity.
By Jia Tolentino
The Art World
A Daring Show Remixes the Monuments of the Confederacy
As the Trump Administration tries to rescue symbols of the Lost Cause, an exhibition in Los Angeles, led by Kara Walker, finds meaning in their desecration.
By Julian Lucas

Sections

NewsBooks & CultureFiction & PoetryHumor & CartoonsMagazineCrosswordVideoPodcasts100th AnniversaryGoings On

More

Manage AccountShop The New YorkerBuy Covers and CartoonsCondé Nast StoreDigital AccessNewslettersJigsaw PuzzleRSSSite Map
AboutCareersContactF.A.Q.Media KitPressAccessibility HelpUser AgreementPrivacy PolicyYour California Privacy Rights

© 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. The New Yorker may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad Choices

Your Privacy Choices