URL: https://www.lockhaven.com/news/arts-culture-scene/2024/02/the-devil-wears-prada-has-excellent-cast-terrible-plot/
Title: ‘The Devil Wears Prada’ has excellent cast, terrible plot | News, Sports, Jobs - The Express

THE EXPRESS
×
News
Sports
Opinion
Life
Obituaries
Classifieds
Jobs
Homes
Garage Sales
Contact Information
Facebook
Twitter
Public Notices
NEWS SPORTS OPINION LIFE OBITUARIES CLASSIFIEDS JOBS HOMES GARAGE SALES PLACE LEGAL NOTICE
SUBSCRIBE
November 09, 2025 | Today's Paper | Submit News | Subscribe Today | Login
‘The Devil Wears Prada’ has excellent cast, terrible plot
ARTS AND CULTURE

FEB 15, 2024

LAURA JAMESON LJAMESON@LOCKHAVEN.COM
 

PHOTO PROVIDED Anne Hathaway, Meryl Streep and Emily Blunt all star in 2006’s “The Devil Wears Prada.”

It’s been a few weeks since I’ve graced The Scene with one of my Throwback Thursday reviews. (I’m sure so many of you — hi Mom and Dad — were just heart broken by this.)

So I’ve returned and with one of my rarer reviews that doesn’t entirely reflect positively on the movie I’ve chosen.

I’d never watched 2006’s “The Devil Wears Prada” until over the weekend. I’d seen references made to it in pop culture since I was little and I know that Meryl Streep and Anne Hathaway in particular were praised for their work in the movie.

I expected to be blown away (maybe that’s my mistake for setting the expectations so high). But I really feel it fell kind of flat.

“The Devil Wears Prada” follows aspiring journalist Andrea “Andy” Sachs who is hired as a junior assistant for Miranda Priestly — the editor-in-chief of Runway magazine.

For Andy, the job is only to serve as a vehicle to a more serious career in journalism. However, as time goes on she finds herself getting sucked into the world of fashion and leaving her loved ones behind.

I’m going to be super honest to everyone… I really don’t understand what the lesson or main plot point of this movie was. It feels like it’s missing some kind of major resolution and lesson that I can’t quite put my finger on.

The climax fell flat for me — with Andy abandoning her job in Paris after she realizes she doesn’t want the life Miranda has — and remained that way for the remainder of the movie.

On top of that, I didn’t really like any of the characters. Mind you, that doesn’t mean I didn’t like the portrayals. Both Streep and Hathaway, unsurprisingly, deliver great performances in their respective roles.

However, the characters themselves feel extremely one dimensional and not super entertaining. I couldn’t really connect with any of them.

Also, don’t get me started on Andy’s boyfriend Nate Cooper (Adrian Grenier). He knew that she was going to take a year at this job to help further her career and yet gets whiny and annoying a few months in because she’s “changing.” No sir, she’s adapting to her environment to survive a cut throat job so she can actually get to the job she wants.

Overall, “The Devil Wears Prada” isn’t something I’d really watch again. It has some good monologues — Streep’s cerulean speech comes to mind — but overall it isn’t a blockbuster, standout movie to me.

The casting, overall, is really great. Streep of course kills it, as usual, with her portrayal of the cut-throat, calm, cool and collected lead of a multi-million dollar company. Her ability to remain one step ahead in most scenarios is certainly something to admire. However, you also can feel a sense of dread about how she goes about treating her employees and those around her. I’d say her character is the most fleshed out of them all. And I have the feeling it’s because Streep is just that good.

Hathaway also does a good job. It’s strange that she’s almost reprising her role from “The Princess Diaries.” A young woman who is suddenly a part of something bigger than herself and going through major changes. Obviously this movie ups it to a more PG-13 rating and has a little more to it, but still… strange she found herself in that position again.

“The Devil Wears Prada” feels like it has a really great cast but suffers from a script that wasn’t all together. That’s not to say there wasn’t some good storytelling and moments that pushed the plot forward. I just personally felt like I couldn’t figure out what exactly the plot was trying to tell me.

“The Devil Wears Prada” is rated PG-13 and may be watched on Max, Hulu, Amazon Prime, Google Play, Apple TV and Vudu.

— — — —

Laura Jameson is Managing Editor of The Express.

NEWSLETTER
Today's breaking news and more in your inbox
Email(Required)
I'm interested in (please check all that apply)(Required)
 Daily Newsletter
 Breaking News
 Obituaries
Are you a paying subscriber to the newspaper?(Required)
 Yes
 No
ARTS AND CULTURE
Sesame Street’s new season: Bubba Wallace, Netflix and a whole lot of chickens

NEW YORK (AP) — New home. Some format changes. Same monsters. “Sesame Street” launches its 56th season on ...

Helen Mirren will receive the Golden Globes’ Cecil B. DeMille award

LOS ANGELES (AP) — Helen Mirren has portrayed multiple queens, a prime minister, a detective, “Barbie” ...

Bad Company, one of rock’s supergroups, pushes the doors open at the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame
Shout-out for yodeling? Swiss seek recognition from UN cultural agency as tradition turns modern
Red Hot Chili Peppers drummer Chad Smith’s Midwest roots inspire surprise gift to U. of Michigan

ANN ARBOR, Mich. (AP) — The Red Hot Chili Peppers may be strongly associated with southern California, but ...

Uptown Music Collective set for ‘no-repeat weekend’ alumni show
MOST READ
Lock Haven wrestling claims three individual titles at Journeymen Classic
Gilfoil leads Lock Haven women's wrestling at Adrian Open
Jersey Shore graduate McCracken leads Lycoming women's hoops in season opener
NEWS
Local news
Business
Community
Obituaries
SPORTS
Local sports
PA Sports
OPINION
Our View
Columns
Letters to the editor
LIFE
Engagements
Weddings
In The Schools
Welcome to Our World
CONTACT US
Submit News
Subscribe
Advertise
Terms of Service

Copyright © 2025 Ogden Publications of Pennsylvania, LLC | https://www.lockhaven.com | 9-11 W. Main Street, Lock Haven, PA 17745 | 570-748-6791