URL: https://www.markreviewsmovies.com/reviews/T/traphouse.htm
Title: TRAP HOUSE - Mark Reviews Movies

	

TRAP HOUSE

Director: Michael Dowse

Cast: Dave Bautista, Jack Champion, Sophia Lillis, Kate del Castillo, Tony Dalton, Whitney Peak, Bobby Cannavale, Inde Navarrette, Zaire Adams, Blu del Barrio

MPAA Rating:  (for some strong violence/bloody images)

Running Time: 1:42

Release Date: 11/14/25 (limited)

 Follow on Facebook |  Follow on Twitter |  Become a Patron

Review by Mark Dujsik | November 13, 2025

The politics of Trap House are odd, which probably isn't a way anyone wants to start a conversation about such a disposable thriller. Here, a group of teens, all of them children of DEA agents, decide to rob a drug cartel to help one of their own, whose father is killed in a raid of that cartel's secret tunnel from Mexico into Texas. Obviously, the cartel members are the villains here, presented exactly as one would expect them to be in this sort of movie.

There could and, maybe in another arena, should be a conversation about this sort of depiction at a time when the actual United States government seems to be going out of its way to villainize and target anyone of Hispanic or Latino descent. It's a given, basically, that the movie's antagonists are lazy clichés, but that's not what makes Gary Scott Thompson and Tom O'Connor's screenplay so politically confusing. That's the sadly, unfortunately straightforward part.

No, it's that the teens, led by Cody (Jack Champion), decide to steal from the drug cartel, using information the teenagers are able to access by being the children of federal agents, because of the systematic failure of the DEA. The organization's operations put its agents in jeopardy for a "war on drugs" that has cost a lot of money and hasn't seen any real results, and when one of those agents is killed in the line of duty, the surviving family is offered barely a pittance in benefits.

How can a movie be so overtly skeptical about the very group and very system it's perfectly comfortable amplifying in order to tell its story? Neither the screenwriters nor director Michael Dowse have any answers, because this turns out to be an inherently cynical and hypocritical movie—criticizing out of one side of its mouth, while the other praises and pampers and paints targets on all the usual suspects.

It doesn't help that the premise itself is quite uncomfortable in a different way. Again, that has a group of teens, basically kids who don't know any better, playing cops to some very deadly robbers. The script makes a big point that Cody is 18, making him legally an adult, but anyone who believes some harebrained plan to rob a drug den with stun guns and night-vision goggles is a good idea probably shouldn't be seen as mature in first place.

The result is watching a bunch of eager kids, including Cody's pals Deni (Sophia Lillis) and Yvonne (Whitney Peak), put themselves in unnecessary danger because the federal agency their parents work for is, by the movie's own accounting, terrible and uncaring and pretty useless. Whatever one's opinion of drug enforcement in the United States may be, this movie ends up feeling at least doubly irresponsible—firstly, to be sure, in catering to stereotypes in order to give us ruthless villains and secondly in putting a bunch of innocent teenagers in the path of those terrible characters for some thrills.

That the movie isn't morally reprehensible is something of an accomplishment, but that's mainly because it possesses the unintentional luck of not having a firm opinion on anything. It's an exploitative bit of genre storytelling that's simply too dumb to be truly offensive.

It at least seems to care after that opening raid, as team leader Ray (Dave Bautista), Cody's widower father, and his fellow agents uncover a hidden tunnel under a gas station. Someone destroys it in a fiery explosion, and an anonymous DEA agent is shot and killed by a sniper watching from Mexico. The agent's son Jesse (Blu del Barrio), one of the group of friends who hang out together at school, and widow discover that the death benefits aren't nearly enough to keep going, so they're going to have to move.

Anyway, that's why Cody comes up with the plan to steal from the cartel and all of the other agents' kids agree to it. Some of the teens have accompanied their parents at regular training exercises, so they have some basic notion of weapons and self-defense. That the resulting heist sequences are played for both some laughs and severe tension, when someone with an actual firearm not loaded with beanbags gets the jump on them, is jarring, but then again, the entire conceit here is discomforting, anyway.

The young actors and Bautista, as the emotionally distant father, are fine enough. The plot, which has the overly protective dad somehow not even suspecting what his son is doing and a twist that's obvious almost as soon as a certain character appears on screen, is much less so. The setup of Trap House is so questionable on so many levels that it just makes us apathetic toward those questions and the movie itself.

Copyright © 2025 by Mark Dujsik. All rights reserved.

 Back to Home

	
 

Buy Related Products