URL: https://collider.com/guillermo-del-toro-review-james-cameron-avatar-fire-and-ash/
Title: Guillermo del Toro Gives His Verdict of James Cameron's 'Avatar: Fire & Ash'

Menu
Sign In Now
Close
MOVIES
SUBMENU
TV
SUBMENU
COLLIDER SIGNATURE
STREAMING GUIDES
SUBMENU
LISTS
REALITY TV
REVIEWS
INTERVIEWS
TRAILERS
VIDEOS
GOT A PITCH?
Sign In
Newsletter
Menu
Sign In Now
Got A Pitch?
Videos
2025 Movie Releases
Screenings
What to Watch
Originals
Reviews
Guillermo del Toro Gives His Verdict of James Cameron's 'Avatar: Fire & Ash'
Image via BauerGriffin/INSTARimages.com/Cover Images
By 
Shrishty Mishra
Published 1 day ago
Shrishty is a decade-old journalist covering a variety of beats between politics to pop culture, but movies are her first love, which led her to study Film and TV Development at UCLAx. She lives and breathes cinema and sometimes wakes up with the close-up shot of Ryan Gosling's hands playing piano in La La Land, in her head.

She has worked with numerous media outlets, including Burda Media (MSN News), DKODING Media, The Voice of Fashion, Hindustan Times, and more. Throughout her career, she has interviewed an array of people, from CEOs and politicians to filmmakers and farmers.


 
Here is a fact-based summary of the story contents:

Guillermo del Toro is responsible for giving us some of the most visually stunning movies with a brilliant emotional core. His latest, Frankenstein starring Oscar Isaac and Jacob Elordi, is enchanting fans worldwide with its gothic imagery, impeccable performances, and universal scope. The filmmaker is a long-time friend of James Cameron, the visionary creator of the Avatar franchise, the third installment of which is due out this December, and del Toro has already seen it.

Del Toro is busy promoting his new movie, and in a recent interview with Knobini, the French equivalent of Criterion Closet, the director revealed that he has seen Avatar: Fire and Ash. "I’ve seen the three Avatars. They are absolute masterpieces. I know where it’s going and I think it’s going to surprise a lot of people." He went on to praise Cameron’s world-building, hyping fans further for what’s to come." He added:

"I can’t say anything about [the third], but I can say there are very few Americans who have created an entire mythology. You have [George] Lucas. You have the entire ‘Wizard of Oz’ mythology with Frank Baum. Jim is creating that with Avatar, and he’s going to take you places."

What To Expect From Upcoming ‘Avatar’ Movies

Del Toro isn’t the only one who is hailing the scope of Cameron’s vision and world building. The first two movies introduced us to Pandora and its inhabitants along with different landscapes and tribes. Fire and Ash will continue to do so, while showcasing how Jake (Sam Worthington) and his family chart these new waters. Sigourney Weaver, a franchise mainstay, previously told Collider about the upcoming installments. “I can't believe we're making a movie that's this ambitious and, frankly, such an honor.”

Weaver, who has read scripts for Avatar 4 and 5, added, “People don't realize how fundamental the work is. They think that we're voicing these characters or that it's a cartoon. When I get on the set of an Avatar film, I'm in a black suit, yeah, but it's like a very early theater rehearsal where you just give it all you've got. It's such fundamental acting work with huge themes and so much at stake, and it's very hard to find that anywhere else.” Fire and Ash will introduce us to a new tribe as the threat of Quaritch (Stephen Lang) looms large.

Fire and Ash comes out on December 19. The first two Avatar films are streaming on Disney+. Frankenstein is streaming on Netflix. Check out del Toro’s comments above and stay tuned to Collider for more updates.

Avatar: Fire and Ash
Science Fiction
Adventure
Fantasy
Release Date
December 19, 2025
Runtime
195 Minutes
Director
James Cameron
7 Images
Cast
See All
Sam Worthington
Jake Sully
Zoe Saldana
Neytiri
Sigourney Weaver
Kiri
Stephen Lang
Colonel Miles Quaritch
Writers
Amanda Silver, Rick Jaffa, James Cameron
Producers
Jon Landau, James Cameron
Prequel(s)
Avatar, Avatar: The Way of Water
Franchise(s)
Avatar
Powered by
Expand
Google is updating how content is shown. Don't miss our industry-leading content, written by humans, by setting Collider as a preferred source.
Movie News
Avatar: Fire and Ash
Guillermo del Toro
Follow
Like
Share
THREAD
Sign In To Your Collider Account

We want to hear from you! Share your opinions in the thread below and remember to keep it respectful.

Be the first to post

This thread is open for discussion.

Be the first to post your thoughts.

Terms
Privacy
Feedback
RECOMMENDED
4 days ago
Sparks Fly Between Charlie Cox and Zooey Deschanel in New Look at Rom-Com 'Merv’ [Exclusive]
4 days ago
‘Trap House' Review: Dave Bautista Gets Lost in This Interesting Take on the Action-Revenge Movie
5 days ago
“We Want To Honor All Those Men”: Zachary Levi on the Challenging Yet Rewarding Task of Bringing ‘Not Without Hope’ to the Cinema [Exclusive]
5 days ago
This Classic 6-Season Sitcom Was a Ratings Smash, but Then It Got Cancelled for a Bizarre Reason
WHAT TO WATCH
July 20, 2025
The 72 Best Movies on Netflix Right Now
TRENDING NOW
Controversial Colleen Hoover Movie Surpasses Tom Cruise's Anti-War Project as It Hits a New Box Office Milestone
‘Breaking Bad' Star’s Action Sequel Dominates Streaming Worldwide After Bombing at the Box Office
‘Chainsaw Man: The Reze Arc’ Surpasses Pixar’s Latest Box Office Flop
Join Our Team
Our Audience
About Us
Press & Events
Media Coverage
Contact Us
Follow Us
Advertising
Careers
Terms
Privacy
Policies
Collider is part of the Valnet Publishing Group
Copyright © 2025 Valnet Inc.